 Chapter 5: Unfair Trade Practices Chapter 5: Unfair Trade Practices Subchapter 1: Consumer Protection Law Subchapter 1: Consumer Protection Law § 20-700 Unfair trade practices prohibited. § 20-700 Unfair trade practices prohibited. No person shall engage in any deceptive or unconscionable trade practice in the sale, lease, rental or loan or in the offering for sale, lease, rental, or loan of any consumer goods or services, or in the collection of consumer debts. § 20-701 Definitions. § 20-701 Definitions. a. Deceptive trade practice. Any false, falsely disparaging, or misleading oral, written, digital, or electronic statement, visual description or other representation or omission of any kind made in connection with the sale, lease, rental, or loan or in connection with the offering for sale, lease, rental, or loan of consumer goods or services, or in the extension of consumer credit or in the collection of consumer debts, which has the capacity, tendency or effect of directly or indirectly deceiving or misleading consumers. Deceptive trade practices include but are not limited to: (1) representations that goods or services have sponsorship, approval, certification, accessories, characteristics, ingredients, uses, benefits, or quantities that they do not have; the supplier has a sponsorship, approval, status, affiliation, or connection that he or she does not have; goods are original or new if they are deteriorated, altered, damaged, refurbished, reconditioned, reclaimed, or secondhand; or, goods or services are of a particular standard, quality, grade, style, or model, if they are of another; (2) the use, in any representation, of exaggeration, innuendo, or ambiguity as to a material fact, or the failure to state a material fact, if such use of, or failure to state, a material fact deceives or tends to deceive; (3) disparaging the goods, services, or business of another by false or misleading representations or omissions of material facts; (4) offering goods or services with intent not to sell them as offered, including by failing to disclose clearly and conspicuously all material exclusions, reservations, limitations, modifications, or conditions on such offer; (5) offering goods or services with intent not to supply reasonable expectable public demand, unless the offer discloses a limitation of quantity; (6) making false or misleading representations of fact, or omitting material facts, concerning the reasons for, existence of, or amounts of price reductions, or price in comparison to prices of competitors or one&apos;s own price at a past or future time; (7) stating that a consumer transaction involves consumer rights, remedies, or obligations that it does not involve; (8) falsely stating that services, replacements or repairs are or are not needed; (9) falsely stating the reasons for offering or supplying goods or services at scale discount prices; and (10) failing to provide a complete and accurate translation of all documents, other than receipts, related to a consumer transaction conducted in a designated citywide language other than English, as defined in section 23-1101 , provided that such transaction was predominantly negotiated in such language, and provided further that, for purposes of this subdivision, the term &quot;predominantly negotiated&quot; means the negotiation of material terms of a consumer transaction, including price, quantity, the description of goods or services, exclusions and conditions; and the term &quot;receipt&quot; means a document that provides only the amount paid by the consumer for each item, the total amount paid by such consumer, the date of the purchase and the legal name and address of the seller. [ALP S-069] b. Unconscionable trade practice. Any act or practice in connection with the sale, lease, rental or loan or in connection with the offering for sale, lease, rental or loan of any consumer goods or services, or in the extension of consumer credit, or in the collection of consumer debts which unfairly takes advantage of the lack of knowledge, ability, experience or capacity of a consumer; or results in a gross disparity between the value received by a consumer and the price paid, to the consumer&apos;s detriment; provided that no act or practice shall be deemed unconscionable under this subchapter unless declared unconscionable and described with reasonable particularity in a local law, or in a rule or regulation promulgated by the commissioner. In promulgating such rules and regulations the commissioner shall consider among other factors: (1) knowledge by merchants engaging in the act or practice of the inability of consumers to receive properly anticipated benefits from the goods or services involved; (2) gross disparity between the price of goods or services and their value measured by the price at which similar goods or services are readily obtained by other consumers; (3) the fact that the acts or practices may enable merchants to take advantage of the inability of consumers reasonably to protect their interests by reason of physical or mental infirmities, illiteracy or inability to understand the language of the agreement, ignorance or lack of education, or similar factors; (4) the degree to which terms of the transaction require consumers to waive legal rights; (5) the degree to which terms of the transaction require consumers to jeopardize money or property beyond the money or property immediately at issue in the transaction; and (6) definitions of unconscionability in statutes, regulations, rulings and decisions of legislative, or judicial bodies in this state or elsewhere. c. Consumer goods, services, credit and debts. As used in section 20-700 of this subchapter and subdivisions a and b of this section, goods, services, credit and debts which are primarily for personal, household or family purposes. d. Consumer. A purchaser or lessee or prospective purchaser or lessee of the consumer goods or services or consumer credit, including a co-obligor or surety. e. Merchant. A seller, lessor, or creditor or any other person who makes available either directly or indirectly, goods, services or credit, to consumers. &quot;Merchant&quot; shall include manufacturers, wholesalers and others who are responsible for any act or practice prohibited by this subchapter. (Am. L.L. 2021/098, 9/26/2021, eff. 1/24/2022) [ALP S-069] Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2021/098 . [ALP S-069] § 20-702 Regulations. § 20-702 Regulations. The commissioner may adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this subchapter, including regulations defining specific deceptive or unconscionable trade practices. Such rules and regulations may supplement but shall not be inconsistent with the rules, regulations and decisions of the federal trade commission and the federal courts in interpreting the provisions of section five (a) (1), the federal trade commission act 15 U.S.C. § 45(a)(1), or the decisions of the courts interpreting section three hundred fifty of the general business law and section 2-302 of the uniform commercial code. § 20-703 Enforcement. § 20-703 Enforcement. a. The violation of any provision of this subchapter or of any rule promulgated thereunder shall be punishable by a civil penalty of not less than $350 nor more than $2,500. Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, a person shall be subject to a civil penalty of $150, $250, and $350 for a first, second and third or any subsequent violation, respectively, of the same rule for: (1) failing to display a sign in the required form or location or with the content required by rule, including but not limited to any such violation of section 24 , 37 , or 66 of chapter 5 of title 6 of the rules of the city of New York, or any successor to such provisions; (2) failing to provide a consumer with a required receipt for a retail purchase below $250, including but not limited to any such violation of section 32 of chapter 5 of such title, or any successor to such provision; (3) charging sales tax on the sale of any good or service not subject to such tax, including but not limited to any such violation of section 41 of chapter 5 of such title, or any successor to such provision; or (4) imposing a restaurant surcharge, including but not limited to any such violation of section 59 of chapter 5 of such title, or any successor to such provision. [ALP S-069] b. Each individual statement, description or other representation or omission that constitutes a deceptive trade practice shall give rise to a distinct and independent violation. [ALP S-069] c. Each day on which an individual statement, description or other representation or omission that constitutes a deceptive trade practice is distributed, broadcast, posted, published, or otherwise exposed to the public shall give rise to a single separate violation; provided, however, that if the department produces evidence sufficient to show that such statement, description or other representation or omission was distributed, broadcast, posted, published, or otherwise exposed to the public on more than one occasion in a single day, each such exposure shall constitute a separate violation, or, alternatively, if the department produces sufficient evidence to show the number of consumers reached by such statement, description or other representation or omission, and that the person making such statement, description or other representation or omission knew, or should have known, that such statement, description or other representation or omission was a deceptive trade practice, a penalty for such violation shall be based instead on each individual consumer reached by such statement, description or other representation or omission. [ALP S-069] d. 1. The knowing violation or the third violation of any provision of this subchapter or of any rule promulgated thereunder shall be punishable: [ALP S-069] i. by a civil penalty of $3,500; or [ALP S-069] ii. as a violation for which a fine of $3,500 shall be imposed; or [ALP S-069] iii. both by a civil penalty and as a violation with a fine as provided in paragraphs i and ii of this subdivision. [ALP S-069] 2. For the purposes of this subdivision, the term &quot;third violation&quot; means a third violation of the same section of this subchapter or rule in a three-year period, provided that each such violation was set forth in a separate guilty plea, decision or settlement agreement. [ALP S-069] e. Whenever any person has engaged in any act or practice which constitutes a violation of any provision of this subchapter or of any rule promulgated thereunder, the city may make application to the supreme court by action or proceeding or the commissioner may commence a proceeding by service of a notice of violation returnable to any tribunal established within the office of administrative trials and hearings or within any agency of the city designated to conduct such proceedings. [ALP S-069] f. In addition to the authority granted to the department under section 2203 of the charter, the corporation counsel may initiate any investigation to ascertain such facts as may be necessary for the commencement of an action or proceeding pursuant to this section, and in connection therewith shall have the power to issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents, to administer oaths and to examine such persons as are deemed necessary. [ALP S-069] g. An application to the supreme court made pursuant to subdivision e may seek an order: [ALP S-069] 1. enjoining such acts or practices, including by granting a temporary or permanent injunction or a restraining order; [ALP S-069] 2. imposing civil penalties pursuant to this section; [ALP S-069] 3. compelling a defendant to make restitution of all monies, property, or other things of value, or proceeds thereof, received directly or indirectly as a result of any such violation; [ALP S-069] 4. directing that the amount of money or the property or other things of value recovered be paid into an account established pursuant to section 2601 of the civil practice law and rules from which shall be paid over to any and all persons who purchased the goods or services during the period of violation such sum as was paid by them in a transaction involving the prohibited acts or practices, plus any costs incurred by such claimants in making and pursuing their complaints; provided that if such claims exceed the sum recovered into the account, the awards to consumers shall be prorated according to the value of each claim proved; [ALP S-069] 5. directing a defendant to pay to the city the costs and disbursements of the action or proceeding and the costs of the city&apos;s investigation leading to the judgment; or if not recovered from a defendant, such costs are to be deducted by the city from the grand recovery before distribution to the consumers; [ALP S-069] 6. directing that any money, property, or other things of value in the account described in this subdivision and unclaimed by any persons with such claims within six years from creation of the account, be paid to the city; and [ALP S-069] 7. granting all other appropriate relief. [ALP S-069] h. Consumers making claims against an account established pursuant to subdivision g shall prove their claims to the commissioner in a manner and subject to procedures established by the commissioner. The procedures established in each case for proving claims shall not be employed until approved by the court, which shall also establish by order the minimum means by which the commissioner shall notify potential claimants of the creation of the account. Restitution pursuant to a judgment in an action or proceeding under this subdivision shall bar, to the extent permitted by law, the recovery of any damages in any other action or proceeding against the same defendant on account of the same acts or practices which were the basis for such judgment, up to the time of the judgment, by any person to whom such restitution is made. Restitution under this subdivision shall not apply to transactions entered into more than five years prior to commencement of an action by the city. Before instituting an action or proceeding under paragraphs 3 through 6 of subdivision g, the commissioner shall give the prospective defendant written notice of the possible action or proceeding at least five days prior to such action or proceeding. [ALP S-069] i. A proceeding by service of a notice of violation returnable to any tribunal established within the office of administrative trials and hearings or within any agency of the city designated to conduct such proceedings, made pursuant to subdivision e, may seek an order: [ALP S-069] 1. granting all applicable civil penalties pursuant to this section; [ALP S-069] 2. compelling a defendant to make restitution of all monies, property, or other things of value, or proceeds thereof, received directly or indirectly as a result of any such violations, to all affected consumers whether named or unnamed; and [ALP S-069] 3. granting all other appropriate relief. [ALP S-069] j. To establish a cause of action under this section it need not be shown that consumers are being or were actually injured. [ALP S-069] (Am. L.L. 2021/098, 9/26/2021, eff. 1/24/2022) [ALP S-069] Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2021/098 . [ALP S-069] § 20-704 Settlements. § 20-704 Settlements. a. In lieu of instituting or continuing an action or proceeding pursuant to this subchapter, the commissioner may accept written assurance of discontinuance of any act or practice in violation of this subchapter from a person who has engaged in such acts or practices. Such assurance may include a stipulation for voluntary payment by the violator of the costs of investigation by the commissioner and may also include a stipulation for the restitution by the violator to consumers, of money, property, or other things of value received from them directly or indirectly in connection with a violation of this subchapter, including money necessarily expended in the course of making and pursuing a complaint to the commissioner. All settlements shall be made a matter of public record. If a stipulation applies to potential claimants, the assurance may specify the minimum means by which such claimants shall be notified of the stipulation. A consumer need not accept restitution pursuant to such a stipulation; his or her acceptance shall bar, to the extent permitted by law, recovery of any other damages in any action or proceeding by him or her against a defendant on account of the same acts or practices. [ALP S-069] b. Violation of an assurance entered into pursuant to this section shall be treated as a violation of this subchapter and shall be subject to all the penalties provided therefor. (Am. L.L. 2021/098, 9/26/2021, eff. 1/24/2022) [ALP S-069] Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2021/098 . [ALP S-069] § 20-705 Persons excluded from this subchapter. § 20-705 Persons excluded from this subchapter. Nothing in this subchapter shall apply to any television or radio broadcasting station or to any publisher or printer of a newspaper, magazine, or other form of printed advertising, who broadcasts, publishes, or prints such advertisement, except insofar as said station or publisher or printer is guilty of deception on the sale or offering for sale of its own services. This subchapter shall not apply to advertising agencies, provided they are acting on information provided by their clients. § 20-706 Permitted practices. § 20-706 Permitted practices. The provisions of this subchapter shall be construed so as to supplement the rules, regulations, and decisions of the federal trade commission and the courts interpreting 15 U.S.C. § 45(a)(1), but the provisions of this subchapter shall in no instance be interpreted in a manner inconsistent with the rules, regulations and decisions of the federal trade commission and the courts interpreting 15 U.S.C. § 45(a)(1). § 20-706.1 Consumer protection outreach and education for young adults. § 20-706.1 Consumer protection outreach and education for young adults. The commissioner shall establish and engage in outreach and education efforts that are tailored to individuals ages sixteen to twenty-four. Such outreach and education shall concern consumer issues that are likely to affect individuals ages sixteen to twenty-four including, but not limited to: (a) credit card debt; (b) student loans; and (c) leasing or purchasing a motor vehicle. Such outreach and education shall also provide information related to the department&apos;s office of financial empowerment and its financial education providers. The outreach and education required by this section shall commence on September 1, 2015 and shall include educational materials that shall be made available on the department&apos;s website, and submitted to the chancellor of the New York city department of education and the chancellor of the city university of New York no later than September 1, 2015. The educational materials made available on the department&apos;s website pursuant to this section shall be made available in English and in the six languages most commonly spoken by limited English proficient individuals in the city as determined by the department of city planning. The commissioner shall update the educational materials made available on the department&apos;s website on an annual basis and submit such updated materials each year to the chancellor of the New York city department of education and the chancellor of the city university of New York. [ALP S-026] (L.L. 2015/028, 3/30/2015, eff. 3/30/2015; Am. L.L. 2026/109, 6/13/2026, eff. 6/13/2026) [ALP S-122] § 20-706.2 Business education events. § 20-706.2 Business education events. a. 1. The commissioner shall organize and conduct business education events during which the department shall provide local businesses with information regarding the laws and rules that are enforced by the department. The commissioner of small business services shall support the department in the organization and operation of such business education events. [ALP S-001] 2. Such business education events shall occur in at least two separate locations within each borough on an annual basis. The first such business education event shall commence on or before June 30, 2015. [ALP S-001] 3. Each business education event shall either focus on a particular industry that is licensed or regulated by the department, or shall focus on one or more of the laws and rules that are relevant to multiple industries and enforced by the department, provided that, information relating to all laws and rules that are enforced by the department, including but not limited to the licensing laws contained in chapter two of title 20 of the administrative code, the consumer protection law contained in this subchapter, and the truth in pricing law contained in subchapter two of chapter five of title 20 of the administrative code, shall be included as a part of at least one business education event each year. [ALP S-001] 4. Any lectures or educational materials designed for the purposes of conducting such business education events shall be made available in English and in the six languages most commonly spoken by limited English proficient individuals, as those languages are determined by the department of city planning. Such educational materials shall be available on the department&apos;s website. [ALP S-001] b. On June 30, 2016, and annually thereafter, the department shall submit to the speaker of the council a report related to the business education events held during the prior 12 month period. Such report shall include, but not be limited to: (i) the number of business education events held; (ii) the location of each business education event; (iii) the number of participants in each business education event disaggregated by location; and (iv) a summary of the information provided to participants. [ALP S-001] (L.L. 2015/068, 6/29/2015, eff. 6/29/2015) [ALP S-001] § 20-706.3 Consumer protection outreach and education for seniors. § 20-706.3 Consumer protection outreach and education for seniors. a. Definitions. For purposes of this section: [ALP S-005] Naturally Occurring Retirement Community. The term &quot;naturally occurring retirement community&quot; means an apartment building, housing complex, or housing development, as identified by the department for the aging: (i) that was not originally built for senior citizens; (ii) that is not restricted in admissions solely to seniors; and (iii) where at least 2,500 senior citizens reside or at least 50 percent of the dwelling units are occupied by one or more senior citizens. [ALP S-005] Senior Center. The term &quot;senior center&quot; shall have the same meaning as provided by section 21-201 . [ALP S-005] b. The commissioner, in consultation with the commissioner for the aging, shall establish and engage in outreach and education efforts that are tailored to individuals ages 60 years and older. Such outreach and education shall relate to consumer issues that are likely to affect individuals ages 60 and older including, but not limited to: (i) telemarketing and internet fraud; (ii) social security, medicare and healthcare fraud; (iii) reverse mortgage products; and (iv) investment schemes. Such outreach and education shall also provide information related to the department&apos;s office of financial empowerment and its financial education providers, as well as information on how to report fraudulent activity. The outreach and education required by this section shall commence on December 1, 2016 and shall include, but not be limited to, educational materials that shall be made available on the department&apos;s website on or before such date, and submitted to the commissioner for the aging no later than December 1, 2016. The educational materials made available on the department&apos;s website pursuant to this section shall be made available in English and in the six languages most commonly spoken by limited English proficient individuals in the city as determined by the department of city planning. The commissioner shall review the educational materials made available on the department&apos;s website, update the educational materials as needed, and submit any such updated materials to the commissioner for the aging annually as needed. [ALP S-005] c. The commissioner for the aging shall make best efforts to ensure that the materials required by subdivision b of this section are made available at every senior center and naturally occurring retirement community as soon as practicable. [ALP S-005] (L.L. 2016/100, 8/31/2016, eff. 8/31/2016; Am. L.L. 2026/109, 6/13/2026, eff. 6/13/2026) [ALP S-122] § 20-706.4 Consumer protection outreach and education for immigrants. § 20-706.4 Consumer protection outreach and education for immigrants. a. Definitions. For purposes of this section: [ALP S-005] IDNYC. The term &quot;IDNYC&quot; means the New York city identity card established pursuant to section 3-115 . [ALP S-005] ITIN. The term &quot;ITIN&quot; means an individual taxpayer identification number issued by the internal revenue service for the purpose of filing federal taxes. [ALP S-005] b. By December 1, 2016, the commissioner, in consultation with the commissioner of the mayor&apos;s office of immigrant affairs, shall establish and implement an outreach and education program to promote the financial stability and success of immigrants. Such outreach and education program shall relate to access to consumer and financial products and services, and protection from risks and frauds to which certain immigrant consumers may be particularly vulnerable, including but not limited to identifying: (i) financial institutions that accept the IDNYC or ITIN for purposes of opening a bank account; (ii) risks and consequences to consumers of using non-bank institutions such as check cashers, money transfer companies and other similar financial institutions; (iii) state and local laws regulating employment and immigration assistance services; (iv) federal and state laws regulating tax preparers; and (v) local institutions that offer preferred products and services to immigrants and immigrant communities, such as community-based organizations, credit unions and other community development financial institutions. [ALP S-005] c. Such outreach and education program shall also provide information related to the office of financial empowerment and its financial education providers. The outreach and education program shall include the production of educational materials that shall be made available on the department&apos;s website and submitted to the commissioner of the mayor&apos;s office of immigrant affairs. The educational materials made available on the department&apos;s website pursuant to this section shall be made available in English and in the six languages most commonly spoken by limited English proficient individuals in the city as determined by the department of city planning. The commissioner shall review the educational materials made available on the department&apos;s website on an annual basis, update the educational material as needed, and submit such updated materials each year to the commissioner of the mayor&apos;s office of immigrant affairs on or before December 1 of each year. [ALP S-005] (L.L. 2016/101, 8/31/2016, eff. 8/31/2016; Am. L.L. 2026/109, 6/13/2026, eff. 6/13/2026) [ALP S-122] § 20-706.5 Consumer protection outreach and education for women. § 20-706.5 Consumer protection outreach and education for women. By December 1, 2016, the commissioner, in consultation with the commission on gender equity, the mayor&apos;s office to end domestic and gender-based violence, and other city agencies as appropriate, shall establish and implement an outreach and education program to promote women&apos;s financial independence, stability and success. Such program shall provide information on issues that typically and especially affect vulnerable populations, including but not limited to the following: (i) short- and long-term financial planning, including planning for retirement; (ii) navigation of public benefits programs; (iii) the prevalence of gender-based pricing; and (iv) deceptive business practices and predatory consumer and financial products. Such outreach and education program shall also provide information related to the office of financial empowerment and its financial education providers. The outreach and education program required by this section shall include the production of educational materials that shall be made available on the department&apos;s website and submitted to the commission on gender equity and the mayor&apos;s office to end domestic and gender-based violence. Such educational materials shall be made available in English and in the six languages most commonly spoken by limited English proficient individuals in the city as determined by the department of city planning. The commissioner shall review the educational materials made available on the department&apos;s website on an annual basis, update the educational material as needed, and submit such updated material to the commission on gender equity, the mayor&apos;s office to end domestic and gender-based violence, and other city agencies as appropriate on or before December 1 of each year. [ALP S-034] (L.L. 2016/099, 8/31/2016, eff. 8/31/2016; Am. L.L. 2019/038, 2/24/2019, eff. 2/24/2019; Am. L.L. 2026/109, 6/13/2026, eff. 6/13/2026) [ALP S-122] § 20-706.6 Consumer protection outreach and education for tourists. § 20-706.6 Consumer protection outreach and education for tourists. a. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following term has the following meaning: [ALP S-122] Designated citywide languages. The term “designated citywide languages” has the same meaning as set forth in section 23-1101 . [ALP S-122] b. The commissioner shall establish and implement an outreach and education program to create awareness of common deceptive trade practices targeting and impacting tourists. [ALP S-122] c. When implementing such program pursuant to subdivision b, the commissioner shall develop educational materials for tourists and promote such materials in locations that tourists are likely to visit. Such educational materials shall include, but need not be limited to: (i) identification of and safety tips for avoiding common deceptive trade practices; (ii) contact information for reporting deceptive trade practices in real time; (iii) information related to hotel service disruptions required pursuant to section 20-851 ; (iv) identification of and rate information for pedicab drivers required pursuant to sections 20-258 and 20-260 ; (v) identification of sightseeing guides, sight-seeing buses or horse drawn cabs, and ticket sellers required pursuant to sections 20-245 , 20-375 , and 20-554 ; and (vi) instructions for filing a consumer complaint with the department and relevant state and federal entities. The commissioner shall make all such educational materials available on the department’s website in English and in all designated citywide languages. [ALP S-122] d. The commissioner shall review the educational materials made available on the department’s website on an annual basis and update such materials as needed on or before December 1 of each year. [ALP S-122] e. The program established by this section shall commence no later than 120 days after the effective date of the local law that added this section. [ALP S-122] (L.L. 2026/109, 6/13/2026, eff. 6/13/2026) [ALP S-122] § 20-706.7 Consumer protection outreach and education on Hajj and Umrah-related scams. § 20-706.7 Consumer protection outreach and education on Hajj and Umrah-related scams. a. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms have the following meanings: [ALP S-122] Designated citywide languages. The term “designated citywide languages” has the same meaning as set forth in section 23-1101 . [ALP S-122] Hajj. The term “Hajj” means the pilgrimage to Mecca, Saudi Arabia that is a pillar of Islam, prescribed as a religious duty for Muslims and that takes place during the last month of the Islamic calendar. [ALP S-122] Umrah. The term “Umrah” means the voluntary Islamic pilgrimage to Mecca, Saudi Arabia, that takes place at any time of the year except Hajj period. [ALP S-122] b. Outreach and education program. &#160; [ALP S-122] 1. The commissioner shall establish and implement an ongoing outreach and education program regarding Hajj and Umrah-related scams, involving at a minimum the development, distribution, and making available of informational materials as required under subdivision c of this section. [ALP S-122] 2. Outreach and education required under paragraph 1 of this subdivision shall relate to the following issues: [ALP S-122] (a) Fraudulent transportation, accommodation, and catering services marketed in connection with Hajj and Umrah; [ALP S-122] (b) Fraudulent visa issuance in connection with Hajj and Umrah; [ALP S-122] (c) How individuals can recognize the activity described in subparagraphs (a) and (b) of this paragraph and fraudulent entities engaging in such activity, and where individuals can report such activity; [ALP S-122] (d) Best practices for booking services in connection with Hajj and Umrah, including but not limited to methods for researching such services, using Saudi Arabia’s official platform for facilitating the performance of Hajj and Umrah, and keeping records of related payments; and [ALP S-122] (e) Any other issue deemed relevant by the commissioner. [ALP S-122] c. 1. The commissioner shall develop informational materials regarding Hajj and Umrah-related scams in English and the designated citywide languages, distribute such materials to the public, and make such materials available on the department’s website. The chairperson of the New York city commission on human rights, the director of the office of immigrant affairs, and the commissioner for the aging shall distribute such materials to the public and make such materials available on their respective agency websites. [ALP S-122] 2. The commissioner shall update the informational materials required under this subdivision as needed. After any such update, the commissioner shall make the updated materials available on the department’s website and the chairperson of the New York city commission on human rights, director of the office of immigrant affairs, and the commissioner for the aging shall make such materials available on their respective agency websites. [ALP S-122] (L.L. 2026/112, 6/19/2026, eff. 6/19/2026) [ALP S-122] Subchapter 2: Truth-in-Pricing Law Subchapter 2: Truth-in-Pricing Law § 20-707 Definitions. § 20-707 Definitions. (a) &quot;Consumer commodity&quot; shall be defined as any article, good, merchandise, product or commodity of any kind or class produced, distributed or offered for retail sale for consumption by individuals, or for personal, household or family purposes. For the purposes of this subchapter, drugs, medicines and cosmetics shall not be considered consumer commodities. (b) &quot;Price per measure&quot; shall be defined as the retail price of a consumer commodity expressed in terms of the retail price of such commodity per such unit of weight, standard measure or standard number of units as the commissioner shall designate by regulation. § 20-708 Display of total selling price by tag or sign. § 20-708 Display of total selling price by tag or sign. All consumer commodities, sold, exposed for sale or offered for sale at retail except those items subject to section 20-708.1 of this code, shall have conspicuously displayed, at the point of exposure or offering for sale, the total selling price exclusive of tax by means of (a) a stamp, tag or label attached to the item or (b) by a sign at the point of display which indicates the item to which the price refers, provided that this information is plainly visible at the point of display for sale of the items so indicated. This section shall not apply to consumer commodities displayed in the window of the seller. Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 1991/084 . [ALP S-085] § 20-708.1 Item pricing. § 20-708.1 Item pricing. a. Definitions. The following terms shall have the following meanings for the purpose of this section: 1. &quot;Stock keeping unit&quot;, known in the industry as &quot;SKU&quot;, shall mean each group of items offered for sale of the same brand name, quantity of contents, retail price, and variety within the following categories: (a) Food, including all material, solid, liquid or mixed, whether simple or compound, used or intended for consumption by human beings or domestic animals normally kept as household pets and all substances or ingredients to be added thereto for any purpose; (b) Napkins, facial tissues, toilet tissues, paper towelling and any disposable wrapping or container for the storage, handling, serving, or disposal of food; (c) Detergents, soaps and other cleansing agents; and (d) Non-prescription drugs, menstrual products and health and beauty aids. [ALP S-093] 2. &quot;Stock keeping item&quot; shall mean each individual item of a stock keeping unit offered for sale. This shall include two or more pieces packaged for sale together. 3. &quot;Retail store&quot; shall mean a store engaged in selling stock keeping units at retail. A store which is not open to the general public but is reserved for use by its members shall come within the provisions of this definition unless the members must pay a direct fee to the store to qualify for membership and the store is not required to collect sales tax on transactions with members. A retail store shall not include any store which: (a) Has as its only full-time employee the owner thereof, or the parent, spouse, domestic partner or child of the owner, and in addition thereto not more than two full-time employees; or (b) Had annual gross sales of stock keeping items in the previous calendar year of less than two million dollars, unless the retail store is part of a network of subsidiaries, affiliates or other member stores, under direct or indirect common control, which, as a group, had annual gross sales of stock keeping items in the previous calendar year of two million dollars or more; or (c) Engages primarily in the sale of food for consumption on the premises or in a specialty trade which the commissioner determines, by rule, would be inappropriate for item pricing. 4. &quot;Item price&quot; shall mean the tag, stamp or mark affixed to a stock keeping item which sets forth, in Arabic numerals, the retail price thereof. 5. &quot;Advertised price&quot; shall mean the price of a stock keeping unit which a retail store has caused to be disseminated by means of promotional methods such as an in-store sign, or newspaper, circular, television or radio advertising. 6. &quot;Shelf price&quot; shall mean the tag or sign placed at each point of display of a stock keeping unit, which clearly sets forth the retail price of the stock keeping items within that stock keeping unit. 7. &quot;Computer-assisted checkout system&quot; shall mean any electronic device, computer system or machine which indicates the selling price of a stock keeping item by interpreting its universal product code, or an in-house product code, or by use of its price look-up function. 8. &quot;Price look-up function&quot; shall mean the capability of any checkout system to determine the retail price of a stock keeping item by way of the manual entry into the system of a code number assigned to that particular stock keeping unit by the retail store or by way of the checkout operator&apos;s consultation of a file maintained at the point of sale. 9. &quot;Inspector&quot; shall mean the commissioner or his or her designee. 10. &quot;Price scanner&quot; shall mean a laser scanning or other computer assisted price checking mechanism used in conjunction with scanner codes. [ALP S-071] b. Item pricing required. Except as provided in subdivision c of this section, every person, firm, partnership, corporation or association which sells, offers for sale or exposes for sale in a retail store, a stock keeping unit, shall disclose to the consumer the item price of each stock keeping item, by causing the item price to be conspicuously, clearly and plainly marked, stamped, tagged or affixed thereto. c. Certain items exempted. The following stock keeping items need not be item priced as provided in subdivision b of this section provided that a shelf price and a price look-up function are maintained for such stock keeping items: 1. Milk. 2. Stock keeping items which are under three cubic inches in size, and weigh less than three ounces, and are priced under one dollar. 3. Eggs. 4. Fresh produce not packaged for final retail sale. 5. Products sold through a vending machine. 6. Food sold for consumption on the premises. 7. Snack foods such as cakes, gum, candies, chips and nuts offered for sale in single packages and weighing five ounces or less. 8. Cigarettes, cigars, tobacco and tobacco products. 9. Food offered for sale in bulk. 10. Frozen juice. 11. Ice cream. 12. Frozen foods packaged for final retail sale in plastic bags. 13. Stock keeping items on sale for one week or less, where such stock keeping items are not otherwise item priced, are located in a segregated display at the end of an aisle, and the sale period, the name of the product and the advertised price are clearly and conspicuously posted on a sign at the point of display. Failure to display this information shall be deemed a deceptive practice under section 20-701 of this code. 14. Baby food packaged in jars. 15. Any stock keeping item that is capable of being scanned, and which is sold, offered for sale, or exposed for sale at a retail store that has, as determined by rule of the commissioner, a sufficient number, in proportion to the retail store size, of clearly marked and functioning price scanners for consumer use, in adequate locations. [ALP S-071] d. Checkout scanner accuracy. In a retail store with a laser scanning or other computer-assisted checkout system, an inspector shall be permitted to compare the disclosed retail price of any one stock keeping item within any stock keeping unit sold in the retail store, whether or not exempt under subdivision c of this section, not to exceed five hundred stock keeping items at any one inspection, with the programmed computer price. The retail store shall provide such access to the computer as is necessary for the inspector to make the determination. The inspector shall also make note of undercharges on the inspection report. In the event that the programmed computer price exceeds the lowest price a retail store is permitted to charge for a stock keeping item under subdivision e of this section, this shall be deemed a deceptive practice under section 20-701 of this code. [ALP S-071] e. Price accuracy. No retail store shall charge a retail price for any stock keeping item, whether or not exempt under subdivision c of this section, which exceeds the lower of any item, shelf, sale or advertised price of such stock keeping item. f. Enforcement, penalties. 1. Upon the request of an inspector, the retail store representatives shall afford the inspector access to the test mode of the checkout system in use at that retail store or to a comparable function of such system and to the retail price information contained in a price look-up function. No more than one inspection shall be conducted in any twenty-four hour period. 2. In addition to the enforcement powers prescribed in sections 20-703 and 20-704 of this code, the commissioner may, upon due notice, hold hearings to determine whether violations of the provisions of this section have occurred. Such notice shall contain a concise statement of the facts constituting the alleged violation and shall set forth the date, time and place of the hearing. Upon a finding of a violation of the provisions of this section, the commissioner shall be authorized to impose a civil penalty as follows: (a) upon inspection, up to $25 for the first 20 violations and up to $50 for each successive violation, total violations not to exceed $2,000, except that a retail store shall not be subject to the civil penalty described above for a first-time violation or first-time violations of subdivision b of this section or any rule promulgated thereunder if such retail store proves to the satisfaction of the department, within 30 days of the issuance of the notice of violation or notices of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of such notice or notices, that the violation or violations have been cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured, shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of presenting proof that the violation or violations have been cured shall be offered as part of any settlement offer made by the department to a retail store that has received a notice of violation or notices of violation for a first-time violation or first-time violations of subdivision b of this section or any rule promulgated thereunder. The department shall permit such proof to be submitted electronically or in person. A retail store may seek review, in the department, of the determination that proof of a cure was not submitted within 15 days of receiving written notification of such determination. [ALP S-067] (b) upon a second or subsequent inspection within 60 days of a violation, up to $50 for the first 20 violations, and up to $100 for each successive violation, total violations issued not to exceed $8,000. [ALP S-010] 3. Each failure to comply with subdivision b of this section with respect to any one stock keeping unit shall constitute a separate violation, provided, however, that no violation shall be found where less than five stock keeping items of a particular stock keeping unit lack clearly readable item prices. Following an initial inspection, each inspection that finds a continuing violation with respect to a particular stock keeping unit cited within the previous fourteen days shall constitute a separate continued violation. g. Rules. The commissioner may promulgate such rules as he or she may deem necessary or appropriate to effectuate the purposes of this section. (Am. L.L. 2017/007, 2/15/2017, eff. 2/15/2017; Am. L.L. 2021/080, 7/18/2021, eff. 11/15/2021; Am. L.L. 2021/129, 11/21/2021, eff. 3/21/2022; Am. L.L. 2024/008, 1/6/2024, eff. 1/6/2024) [ALP S-093] Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 1991/094 , L.L. 1998/027 , and L.L. 2021/080 . [ALP S-085] § 20-709 Display of price per measure. § 20-709 Display of price per measure. All consumer commodities designated by the commissioner in accordance with subdivision (a) of section 20-710 hereof exposed for sale or offered for sale shall be plainly marked by a stamp, tag, label or sign at the point of display with the appropriate price per measure; provided however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any food store having had annual gross sales in the previous tax year of less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars, ($250,000) unless it is a part of a network of subsidiaries, affiliates, or other member stores, under direct or indirect common control, which, as a group, had annual gross sales in the previous tax year of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000) or more. § 20-710 Regulations. § 20-710 Regulations. (a) The commissioner after public hearings shall promulgate regulations designating those consumer commodities which shall come within the scope of section 20-709 of this subchapter whenever the commissioner shall find that, because of the nature, form, mode of packaging or other reason, such price display for that commodity shall be necessary and appropriate to provide adequate information to the consumer. (b) The commissioner shall promulgate regulations exempting any class or classes of retail establishments from the requirements of section 20-709 hereof or modifying its application with respect to any class or classes of retail establishments to the extent that and under such conditions as are consistent with the policy of this subchapter whenever the commissioner shall find that, because of the nature of such class or classes of retail establishments, compliance with section 20-709 hereof is unreasonably burdensome or unnecessary for adequate protection of consumers. (c) The commissioner shall promulgate such other regulations as shall be necessary in his or her discretion to effectuate the purposes of this subchapter, including but not limited to, requirements as to the manner of display of unit price information. § 20-711 Penalties. § 20-711 Penalties. Any person who shall violate the provisions of section 20-708 or section 20-709 hereof or rules promulgated pursuant to this subchapter, other than the provisions of section 20-708.1 or rules promulgated under such section, shall pay a civil penalty of fifty dollars for the first violation, one hundred and seventy-five dollars for the second violation and two hundred fifty dollars for the third and each subsequent violation and shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars nor more than two hundred fifty dollars for each violation; except that a person shall be subject to a civil penalty of zero dollars for a first violation of section 20-708 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, if such person proves to the satisfaction of the department, within thirty days of the issuance of the notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the violation, that the violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured, shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of presenting proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of any settlement offer made by the department to a person who has received, for the first time, a notice of violation of section 20-708 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder. The department shall permit such proof to be submitted electronically or in person. A person may seek review, in the department&apos;s administrative tribunal, of the determination that the person has not submitted proof of a cure within fifteen days of receiving written notification of such determination. For the purposes of this section, each group of identical consumer commodities for which on any single day the total selling price or price per measure is not displayed in accordance with section 20-708 or section 20-709 or rules promulgated pursuant to this subchapter, other than the provisions of section 20-708.1 or rules promulgated under such section, shall be considered a single violation. [ALP S-067] (Am. L.L. 2021/080, 7/18/2021, eff. 11/15/2021) [ALP S-067] Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 1991/084 and L.L. 2021/080 . [ALP S-085] Subchapter 3: Emergency Contraception Subchapter 3: Emergency Contraception (Title amended by L.L. 2021/080, 7/18/2021, eff. 11/15/2021) [ALP S-067] Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2021/080 . [ALP S-067] § 20-712 Definitions. § 20-712 Definitions. As used in this subchapter, the following terms have the following meanings: [ALP S-067] Emergency contraception. The term &quot;emergency contraception&quot; means one or more prescription drugs, used separately or in combination, to be administered to or self-administered by the patient in a dosage and manner for preventing pregnancy when used after intercourse, found safe and effective for that use by the United States food and drug administration, and dispensed for that purpose in accordance with professional standards of practice. [ALP S-067] Pharmacy. The term &quot;pharmacy&quot; means any retail outlet selling prescription drugs within the city. [ALP S-067] Prescription drugs. The term &quot;prescription drugs&quot; means any drug which may be dispensed only with a physician&apos;s prescription. [ALP S-067] (Am. L.L. 2021/080, 7/18/2021, eff. 11/15/2021) [ALP S-067] Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2021/080 . [ALP S-067] § 20-713 Display of prescription drug prices. [Repealed] § 20-713 Display of prescription drug prices. [Repealed] (Repealed L.L. 2021/080, 7/18/2021, eff. 11/15/2021) [ALP S-067] Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2021/080 . [ALP S-067] § 20-713.1 Display of information relating to emergency contraception. § 20-713.1 Display of information relating to emergency contraception. Any pharmacy that does not sell emergency contraception must conspicuously post, at or adjacent to each counter over which prescription drugs are sold, indicating in large type that emergency contraception is not sold at such pharmacy. § 20-714 Regulations. § 20-714 Regulations. The commissioner shall promulgate such regulations as shall be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this subchapter. [ALP S-067] (Am. L.L. 2021/080, 7/18/2021, eff. 11/15/2021) [ALP S-067] Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2021/080 . [ALP S-067] § 20-715 Penalties. § 20-715 Penalties. Any person who violates the provisions of section 20-713.1 or regulations promulgated pursuant to this subchapter shall pay a civil penalty of one hundred seventy-five dollars for the first offense, five hundred dollars for the second offense and seven hundred and fifty dollars for the third offense and each succeeding offense and shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars nor more than five hundred dollars for the first offense and for each succeeding offense a fine of not less than five hundred dollars nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars for each such violation. For the purposes of this section, if on any single day the required signage is not displayed in accordance with section 20-713.1 or regulations promulgated pursuant to this subchapter, it shall be considered a single violation. [ALP S-067] (Am. L.L. 2021/080, 7/18/2021, eff. 11/15/2021; Am. L.L. 2021/098, 9/26/2021, eff. 11/15/2021) [ALP S-067] Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2021/080 and L.L. 2021/098 . [ALP S-067] Subchapter 4: Information with Respect to Room Air Conditioners Subchapter 4: Information with Respect to Room Air Conditioners § 20-716 Legislative findings. § 20-716 Legislative findings. The council hereby finds that the demand for electricity in the city has been steadily growing; that the supply of electricity has on frequent occasions been inadequate fully to meet the demand therefor; that the distribution system of the public utility company serving most of the city has frequently been disrupted by heavy loads; that major brownouts and blackouts in various sections of the city have frequently resulted from such conditions, particularly in the summer; that there is no present basis for concluding that such conditions will not continue for the foreseeable future; that fifty percent of the annual summer growth in demand for electricity in the city is due to air conditioning, that forty percent of the peak summer demand for electricity in the city is attributable to air conditioning; that room air conditioners use a significant part of the electricity used for air conditioning in the city; that the amount of electricity used by room air conditioners of comparable cooling capacity varies widely; that most sellers of room air conditioners do not presently advertise, display or otherwise provide prospective purchasers information as to the amount or cost of electricity required to operate the various models of room air conditioners; that such information, if provided, would lead consumers to purchase more efficient models; that the growth in demand for electricity in the city, particularly in summer months, would thereby be slowed and there would be an amelioration of some of the conditions which lead to brownouts and blackouts. The council also finds that an adequate supply of electricity is vital to the health, safety and welfare of all persons in the city. Accordingly, the council further finds that, in order to conserve electricity, there is a need to provide prospective purchasers of room air conditioners with information with respect to the efficiency and cost of operation of such units. § 20-717 Definitions. § 20-717 Definitions. (a) &quot;Room air conditioner&quot; shall be defined as any electrical appliance which has a compressor, a condenser, an evaporator and a fan to cool and dehumidify the surrounding air and which is capable in ordinary usage of being mounted in a window or through a wall. (b) &quot;Cooling capacity rating&quot; shall be defined as the quantity of heat in British thermal units which a room air conditioner is capable of removing in one hour. (c) &quot;Wattage rating&quot; shall be defined as the number of watts of electricity necessary to obtain the cooling capacity rating of a room air conditioner. (d) &quot;Person&quot; shall be defined as any individual, firm, company, partnership, corporation, association or other organization who is ordinarily engaged in the business of selling or offering for sale room air conditioners. § 20-718 Display of information. § 20-718 Display of information. Any person selling, offering for sale or displaying for sale any room air conditioner shall set forth by a stamp, tab, label or sign at the point of display the model number, cooling capacity rating, wattage rating and estimated yearly cost of electricity necessary to operate such room air conditioner. § 20-719 Furnishing information. § 20-719 Furnishing information. Upon request, any person selling or offering for sale any room air conditioner shall furnish to anyone who inquires about such room air conditioner information as to the model number, cooling capacity rating, wattage rating and estimated yearly cost of electricity necessary to operate such room air conditioner. § 20-720 Advertising. § 20-720 Advertising. Any person who advertises a room air conditioner for sale in the city shall include in any advertisement therefor the model number, cooling capacity rating, wattage rating and estimated yearly cost of electricity necessary to operate such room air conditioner. § 20-721 Regulations. § 20-721 Regulations. (a) The commissioner shall adopt regulations setting forth procedures for determining the cooling capacity rating, wattage rating and estimated yearly cost of electricity necessary to operate room air conditioners. (b) In determining procedures for estimating the yearly cost of electricity necessary to operate room air conditioners, the commissioner may use such published electric rate or rates, hours of operation, and average thereof as he or she deems reasonable. Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 1996/059 . [ALP S-085] § 20-722 Penalties. § 20-722 Penalties. Any person or agent or employee thereof who shall violate any provision of this subchapter or of the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto shall be subject to a civil penalty of twenty-five dollars for each day in which a violation occurs, except that any person or agent or employee thereof shall be subject to a civil penalty of zero dollars for a first violation of any provision of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder. The notice of violation for such first violation shall inform the respondent of the provision of law or rule that the department believes the respondent has violated, describe the condition or activity that is the basis for the notice of violation, and advise the respondent that the law authorizes civil penalties for such violation and that subsequent violations may result in the imposition of such civil penalties. [ALP S-067] (Am. L.L. 2021/080, 7/18/2021, eff. 11/15/2021) [ALP S-067] Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2021/080 . [ALP S-067] Subchapter 5: Representations in Advertising Subchapter 5: Representations in Advertising § 20-723 Representations in advertising. § 20-723 Representations in advertising. No person, firm, corporation or association, or agent or employee thereof, doing business in New York city, who with intent to sell or in any way dispose of merchandise to the public through the media of a newspaper, magazine, circular, pamphlet, catalogue, store display, letter or handbill shall advertise, state, set forth, print, publish or cause directly or indirectly or permit directly or indirectly, so to be done in any of the aforesaid media, any of the following or anything approximating any of the following: (a) That the merchandise offered as aforesaid is being offered at &quot;wholesale price&quot; or at &quot;manufacturers&apos; cost&quot; or &quot;less than cost&quot; or any similar language, unless such representations are true in fact; nor shall any such person, firm or corporation or association, or agent or employee thereof, doing business in New York city, offer for sale any product at a price purported to be reduced from what is a fictitious &quot;list&quot; or &quot;selling&quot; or &quot;retailer&apos;s suggested&quot; price, or at a purported reduction in any such price when such purported reduction is in fact fictitious. (b) That the merchandise offered as aforesaid is being offered on the basis of comparative prices or percentage savings, or similar or analogous claims by the use of such terms as &quot;comparable value&quot; or &quot;comparable retail value,&quot; without denoting, defining or describing the standard of comparison. (c) That the merchandise offered as aforesaid is being offered as &quot;made to sell for&quot;, or being &quot;worth&quot; or &quot;valued at,&quot; a certain price greater or more than the price sought, or by the use of similar or analogous statements unless such claim or representation is true in fact. § 20-723.1 Advertising disclosure requirements for lenders promoting payday loan services. § 20-723.1 Advertising disclosure requirements for lenders promoting payday loan services . a. Definitions. For purposes of this section: (1) &quot;Payday loan&quot;, also known as, among other terms, &quot;deferred deposit advances,&quot; &quot;cash on demand&quot; or &quot;cash advance,&quot; shall mean any transaction in which funds are provided to a consumer for a limited time period in exchange for (i) a consumer&apos;s personal check or share draft, in the amount of the funds provided to the consumer plus a fee, where presentment or negotiation of such check or share draft is deferred by agreement of the parties until a designated future date; or (ii) a consumer&apos;s authorization to debit the consumer&apos;s transaction account, in the amount of the funds provided to the consumer plus a fee, where such account will be debited on or after a designated future date. (2) &quot;Unit of advertising space&quot; shall mean any real property, space, facility or instrumentality, or any portion thereof, owned or operated by the city of New York, or which is located or operates on real property owned or operated by the city of New York, and which is the subject of the same contract, lease, rental agreement, franchise, revocable consent, concession or other similar written agreement with the city of New York which allows the placement or display of advertisements, but not including any real property, space or facility leased from the city of New York for a term of thirty years or more during the entire term of the lease or any real property, space or facility leased from or to the industrial development agency. b. Any lender, bank or other financial institution that provides payday loan or grant services and which promotes its payday loan or grant services, however described or designated, via a unit or units of advertising space, and which, because of the application of other state or federal law, is exempt from the fee limitations of New York state, and charge interest, fees and other charges greater than those authorized in New York state, shall comply with the following disclosure requirements with respect to a unit or units of advertising space: Advertisements shall disclose, in clear and prominent letter type, in a print color that contrasts with the background against which it appears, of at least a 20-point type size: i. the maximum annual percentage rates (APR) of the institution&apos;s payday loans, computed in accordance with regulations adopted pursuant to the federal Truth-in-Lending Act; and ii. any membership fees, finance charges, annual fees, transaction fees, rollover costs, lender&apos;s fees or any other possible charges that may be incurred by a consumer in relation to the institution&apos;s payday loans, including any interest, fees and other charges due at the time of any loan renewal; iii. the state in which the lender/financial institution is chartered; iv. the fact that the consumer will be required to supply personal information to receive the institution&apos;s payday loan, including information regarding his or her personal financial history; v. the fact that a fee schedule for all charges related to the institution&apos;s payday loans will be available upon request; vi. a contact number, such as the New York state banking department&apos;s Consumer Hotline, where a consumer/applicant can direct complaints against the lender/financial institution; vii. the name of the lender/financial institution offering the payday loan. c. Any person who is a party to an otherwise valid agreement with the city of New York in effect on the date of enactment of the local law that added this section shall not be subject to the requirements of this section for the term of such agreement. However, where such agreement provides for a right or rights of renewal for one or more periods upon the same terms and conditions or terms and conditions set forth in such agreement, the holder who is a party to such agreement or any agreements entered into pursuant to such right or rights of renewal shall be subject to the requirements of this section at the commencement of the first renewal period. d. (1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the department shall be authorized upon due notice and hearing, to impose civil penalties for the violation of any provision of this section. The department shall have the power to render decisions and orders and to impose civil penalties not to exceed the amounts specified in section 20-726 of this subchapter for each such violation. All proceedings authorized pursuant to this paragraph shall be conducted in accordance with rules promulgated by the commissioner. The remedies and penalties provided for in this paragraph shall be in addition to any other remedies or penalties provided for the enforcement of such provisions under any other law including, but not limited to, civil or criminal actions or proceedings. (2) All such proceedings shall be commenced by the service of a notice of violation returnable to the administrative tribunal of the department. The commissioner shall prescribe the form and wording of notices of violation. The notice of violation or copy thereof when filled in and served shall constitute notice of the violation charged, and, if sworn to or affirmed, shall be prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein. § 20-723.2 Disclosure requirements for businesses promoting credit counseling services. § 20-723.2 Disclosure requirements for businesses promoting credit counseling services . a. Definitions. For purposes of this section: (1) &quot;Credit counselor&quot; shall mean any person, partnership, firm, corporation or business entity advertising, promoting, or offering the type or category of credit counseling services required to be received as a pre-condition for filing a petition for bankruptcy under the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2005, including, but not limited to, consideration of alternatives to resolve a client&apos;s credit problems and an analysis of the client&apos;s budget, current financial condition, factors that caused such financial condition, and how such client can develop a plan to respond to the problems without incurring negative amortization of debt. (2) &quot;Approved credit counselor&quot; shall mean a credit counselor listed in the directory of authorized nonprofit budget and credit counseling service providers promulgated pursuant to the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2005. b. (1) Any person, partnership, firm, corporation or business entity promoting or offering the services of a credit counselor, notwithstanding whether such person, partnership, firm, corporation or business entity accepts a fee for such services, shall provide written notice to any potential or actual consumer when such person, partnership, corporation, firm or business is not an approved credit counselor. (2) Such notice, to be signed by any potential or actual consumer, shall include, but not be limited to, the following provisions: i. that the federal Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2005 created an approval process for nonprofit budget and credit counseling agencies that provide an evaluation of your current financial situation, a discussion on alternatives to bankruptcy and a personal budget plan; ii. that to be approved by the United States Trustee and added to the directory of approved credit counselors, a credit counselor must satisfactorily demonstrate compliance with the requirements of the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2005; iii. that such credit counselor is not approved to offer bankruptcy counseling services pursuant to the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2005; iv. that a consumer of a credit counselor may contact the United States department of justice or the clerk of the United States bankruptcy court for the southern and eastern districts of New York for a list of credit counselors approved pursuant to the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2005, if such consumer is considering filing a bankruptcy petition; v. that a consumer of a credit counselor is not required to obtain a loan or enter into a contract for debt repayment with any specific credit counselor; and vi. such other provisions as the department may deem appropriate. c. Any person, partnership, firm, corporation or business entity that holds itself out to the public in printed, televised, or radio media as providing the services of a credit counselor but is not an approved credit counselor shall disclose in such media that it is not an approved credit counselor pursuant to the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2005. d. (1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the department shall be authorized upon due notice and hearing, to impose civil penalties for the violation of any provision of this section. The department shall have the power to render decisions and orders and to impose civil penalties of not less than two thousand five hundred dollars nor more than five thousand dollars for each violation. All proceedings authorized pursuant to this paragraph shall be conducted in accordance with rules promulgated by the commissioner. The remedies and penalties provided for in this paragraph shall be in addition to any other remedies or penalties provided for the enforcement of such provisions under any other law including, but not limited to, civil or criminal actions or proceedings. (2) All such proceedings shall be commenced by the service of a notice of violation returnable to the administrative tribunal of the department. The commissioner shall prescribe the form and wording of notices of violation. The notice of violation or copy thereof shall constitute notice of the violation charged, and, if sworn to or affirmed, shall be prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein. (3) The commissioner shall conspicuously disclose on its web site all persons, partnerships, firms, corporations or business entities that have been found to have violated any provisions of this section, or rules and regulations promulgated hereunder, within the preceding twelve months. Such disclosure shall, at minimum, list the name of each person, partnership, firm, corporation or business entity found to have violated any provisions of this section, or rules and regulations promulgated hereunder, as well as the nature of each violation. Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2006/034 . [ALP S-084] § 20-723.3 Disclosure requirements for distressed property consultants. § 20-723.3 Disclosure requirements for distressed property consultants . a. Definitions. For the purposes of this section the following terms shall have the following meanings: 1. &quot;Consulting services&quot; means services promised by a distressed property consultant to a homeowner, including but not limited to services that the consultant represents will help to achieve any of the following: i. An action to stop, enjoin, delay, set aside, annul, stay or postpone a foreclosure filing, a foreclosure sale or the loss of a home for nonpayment of taxes; ii. A forbearance from any servicer, beneficiary or mortgagee or relief with respect to the potential loss of the home for nonpayment of taxes; iii. The exercise of a right of reinstatement or similar right by the homeowner as provided in the mortgage documents or any law or the refinancing of a distressed home loan; iv. Any extension of the period within which the homeowner may reinstate or otherwise restore his or her rights with respect to the property; v. A waiver of an acceleration clause contained in any promissory note or contract secured by a mortgage on a property in foreclosure; vi. A loan or advance of funds; vii. Assistance to the homeowner in answering or responding to a summons and complaint, or otherwise providing information regarding the foreclosure complaint and process; viii. The avoidance or amelioration of the impairment of the homeowner&apos;s credit resulting from the commencement of a foreclosure proceeding or tax sale; ix. The saving of the homeowner&apos;s property from foreclosure or loss for non-payment of taxes; or x. Any other action as may be deemed subject to section 265-b of the New York state general business law. 2. &quot;Distressed home loan&quot; means a home loan that is in danger of being foreclosed because the homeowner has one or more defaults under the mortgage that entitles the lender to accelerate full payment of the mortgage and repossess the property, or a home loan where the lender has commenced a foreclosure action. For purposes of this paragraph, a &quot;home loan&quot; is a loan in which the debt is incurred by the homeowner, or shareholder in a cooperative corporation, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, and the loan is secured by a mortgage or deed of trust on property, or in the case of a cooperative by a security agreement in shares in a corporation, upon which there is located or there is to be located a structure or structures intended principally for occupancy of from one to four families, which is or will be occupied by the homeowner as the homeowner&apos;s principal dwelling. 3. &quot;Distressed property consultant&quot; means an individual or corporation, partnership, limited liability company or other business entity that, directly or indirectly, solicits or undertakes employment to provide consulting services to a homeowner for compensation or promise of compensation with respect to a distressed home loan or a potential loss of the home for nonpayment of taxes, or any individual or business entity considered a distressed property consultant for purposes of New York state real property law section 265-b. A distressed property consultant does not include the following: i. An attorney admitted to practice in the State of New York; ii. A person or entity who holds or is owed an obligation secured by a lien on any property in foreclosure while the person or entity performs services in connection with the obligation or lien; iii. A bank, trust company, private banker, bank holding company, savings bank, savings and loan association, thrift holding company, credit union or insurance company organized under the laws of this state, another state or the United States, or a subsidiary or affiliate of such entity or a foreign banking corporation licensed by the superintendent of banks or the comptroller of the currency; iv. A federal Department of Housing and Urban Development approved mortgagee and any subsidiary or affiliate of such mortgagee, and any agent or employee of these persons while engaged in the business of such mortgagee; v. A judgment creditor of the homeowner, if the judgment creditor&apos;s claim accrues before the written notice of foreclosure sale is sent; vi. A title insurer authorized to do business in this state, while performing title insurance and settlement services; vii. A person licensed as a mortgage banker or registered as a mortgage broker or registered as a mortgage loan servicer as defined in article 12-d of the New York state banking law; viii. A bona fide not-for-profit organization that offers counseling or advice to homeowners in foreclosure or loan default; or ix. A person or entity that the superintendent of banks has determined is not subject to section 265-b of the New York state real property law. 4. &quot;Homeowner&quot; means a natural person who is the mortgagor with respect to a distressed home loan or who is in danger of losing a home for nonpayment of taxes. 5. &quot;Unit of advertising space&quot; means any real property, space, facility or instrumentality, or any portion thereof, owned or operated by the city of New York, or which is located or operates on real property owned or operated by the city of New York, and which is the subject of the same contract, lease, rental agreement, franchise, revocable consent, concession or other similar written agreement with the city of New York which allows the placement or display of advertisements, but not including any real property, space or facility leased from the city of New York for a term of thirty years or more during the entire term of the lease or any real property, space or facility leased from or to the industrial development agency. b. Every distressed property consultant who does business in New York City and who advertises distressed property consulting services through the media of a newspaper, magazine, circular, pamphlet, store display, letter or handbill and/or via a unit or units of advertising space, shall disclose in such advertising, in accordance with the rules established by the commissioner, in clear and prominent letter type, in a print color that contrasts with the background against which it appears: 1. that, pursuant to section 265-b of the New York state real property law, a distressed property consultant is prohibited from: i. performing services without a written, fully executed contract with a homeowner; ii. accepting payment for consulting services before the full completion of such services; iii. taking power of attorney from a homeowner; and iv. retaining any original loan document or other original document related to the distressed home loan, the property, or the potential loss of the home for nonpayment of taxes. 2. that hiring a distressed property consultant does not stop the foreclosure process, nor can a distressed property consultant guarantee any particular result with regards to a distressed property. c. The commissioner may make and promulgate such rules as may be necessary for the proper implementation and enforcement of this section. d. Any person who is a party to an otherwise valid agreement with the city of New York in effect on the date of enactment of the local law that added this section shall not be subject to the requirements of this section for the term of such agreement. However, where such agreement provides for a right or rights of renewal for one or more periods upon the same terms and conditions or terms and conditions set forth in such agreement, the holder who is a party to such agreement or any agreements entered into pursuant to such right or rights of renewal shall be subject to the requirements of this section at the commencement of the first renewal period. e. (1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the department shall be authorized upon due notice and hearing, to impose civil penalties for the violation of any provision of this section. The department shall have the power to render decisions and orders and to impose civil penalties of not less than two thousand five hundred dollars nor more than five thousand dollars for each violation. All proceedings authorized pursuant to this paragraph shall be conducted in accordance with rules promulgated by the commissioner. The remedies and penalties provided for in this paragraph shall be in addition to any other remedies or penalties provided for the enforcement of such provisions under any other law including, but not limited to, civil or criminal actions or proceedings. (2) All such proceedings shall be commenced by the service of a notice of violation returnable to the administrative tribunal of the department. The commissioner shall prescribe the form and wording of notices of violation. The notice of violation or copy thereof shall constitute notice of the violation charged, and, if sworn to or affirmed, shall be prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein. Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2009/074 . [ALP S-083] § 20-724 Requirements of records. § 20-724 Requirements of records. Any such person, firm, corporation or association or agent, or employee thereof, doing business in New York city, making any one or more of the aforesaid statements, claims, offers, or representations of the types described in subdivisions (a), (b) and (c) of section 20-723 shall maintain full and adequate records disclosing the facts upon which any such statements, offers, claims or representations are based. (a) All such records shall be open and available for inspection to the commissioner or to his or her duly designated representatives for a period of ninety days from the date of the offer. (b) The failure of any such person, firm, corporation or association, or agent or employee thereof doing business in New York city to produce such records in substantiation of its claims shall be presumptive of the falsity of the advertisement. § 20-725 Rules and regulations. § 20-725 Rules and regulations. The commissioner may make and promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this subchapter. § 20-726 Violations. § 20-726 Violations. Any person, firm, corporation or association or agent or employee thereof, who shall violate any of the provisions of this subchapter upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500) or by imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30) days, or by both. Subchapter 6: Availability for Sale of Advertised Merchandise [Repealed] Subchapter 6: Availability for Sale of Advertised Merchandise [Repealed] § 20-727 Raincheck issuance disclosure. [Repealed] § 20-727 Raincheck issuance disclosure. [Repealed] (Repealed L.L. 2023/151, 11/17/2023, eff. 5/15/2024) [ALP S-097] § 20-728 Penalties. [Repealed] § 20-728 Penalties. [Repealed] (Am. L.L. 2021/080, 7/18/2021, eff. 11/15/2021; repealed L.L. 2023/151, 11/17/2023, eff. 5/15/2024) [ALP S-097] Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2013/153 and L.L. 2021/080 . [ALP S-082] § 20-729 Regulations. [Repealed] § 20-729 Regulations. [Repealed] (Repealed L.L. 2023/151, 11/17/2023, eff. 5/15/2024) [ALP S-097] Subchapter 7: Information with Respect to Funeral Costs Subchapter 7: Information with Respect to Funeral Costs § 20-730 Definitions. § 20-730 Definitions. a. &quot;Alternative container&quot; means a non-metal receptacle or enclosure customarily not ornamented and designed for holding or transporting human remains. b. &quot;Cash advances&quot; or &quot;accommodations&quot; means amounts advanced on the customer&apos;s behalf for various services and merchandise, including, but not limited to: cemetery or crematory charges, clergy honorarium, flowers, newspaper death notices, pall bearers, music, transportation charges, out-of-town funeral director&apos;s charges, hairdressers, bridge and road tolls, telephone and telegraph charges, gratuities. c. &quot;Casket&quot; includes a coffin and means a rigid container designed for the encasement of human remains and customarily ornamented and lined with fabric. d. &quot;Customer&quot; means any person, association or other entity who purchases or otherwise makes arrangements for the purchase of funeral services or merchandise, without intention of resale. e. &quot;Defacement&quot; means any deliberate effort to make merchandise appear unattractive to customers including, but not limited to, displaying broken, soiled or defective merchandise. f. &quot;Funeral merchandise&quot; means articles and supplies sold or offered for sale directly to the public, or used by funeral directors, incident to: (1) the care and preparation of deceased human bodies for burial, cremation or other final disposition; (2) the arrangement, supervision or conducting of the funeral ceremony. g. &quot;Funeral services&quot; means services performed incident to: (1) the care and preparation of deceased human bodies for burial, cremation, or other final disposition; (2) the arrangement, supervision or conducting of the funeral ceremony and the final disposition of the deceased including, but not limited to, transporting the remains, securing necessary permits, embalming, arranging for death notices, and other funeral-related items. h. &quot;Funeral service establishment&quot; means the premises used or held out as being used to care for and prepare for burial of the body of a deceased person or maintained as the office from which business is transacted by a funeral director or undertaker. i. &quot;Immediate cremation&quot; means a disposition of human remains which includes the reduction of the remains by a heating process and which does not involve formal viewing or a prior funeral ceremony with the body present. j. &quot;Memorial society&quot; means an unincorporated association or not-for-profit corporation which assists members in obtaining and making arrangements for funerals, cremations or other methods of disposition. k. &quot;Offered for sale&quot; means making available for purchase or suggesting availability of merchandise or services for purchase by use of any advertising or promotional materials, including brochures, handbills, or calendars, or by the displaying of merchandise, or verbal or written expressions, direct or indirect, of a willingness to furnish services or merchandise to the public for a retail price. l. &quot;Outer interment receptacle&quot; means any container or enclosure which is placed in the grave around the casket to protect the casket or to prevent the collapse of the grave including, but not limited to, receptacles commonly known as burial vaults, grave boxes, or grave liners. m. &quot;Provider of funeral services&quot; means any person, partnership or corporation, or any employee or agent thereof, engaged in the business of selling or offering for sale, directly to the public, funeral services or funeral merchandise; of preparing deceased human bodies for burial, cremation or other final disposition; or of conducting or arranging funerals. § 20-731 Casket and outer interment receptacle information. § 20-731 Casket and outer interment receptacle information. a. Any provider of funeral services who offers a casket for sale, or an outer interment receptacle for sale in a selection room, shall prominently display the actual retail price on each casket or outer interment receptacle, in at least one-half inch numbers, as well as composition and model number of such casket or outer interment receptacle. b. Any provider of funeral services who offers a casket or an outer interment receptacle for sale by means other than a selection room shall present to a customer for his or her selection a photograph or other pictorial representation of each model of casket or other interment receptacle so offered, with the price, composition and model number prominently displayed. § 20-732 Statement to be furnished by provider of funeral services. § 20-732 Statement to be furnished by provider of funeral services. Any provider of funeral services shall prominently display on the funeral services establishment premises and make readily available to any customer or prospective customer a printed presentation sheet. The presentation sheet shall contain an itemized list of all funeral merchandise and services available at the establishment, a statement that the prices therefor are available upon request, and appropriate disclosures regarding legal requirements for procurement of funeral merchandise and services, the form and contents of which shall be prescribed by the commissioner. The presentation sheet shall be made current annually. § 20-733 Prohibited practices. § 20-733 Prohibited practices. It shall be unlawful for any provider of funeral services: a. to embalm without orally informing the customer that embalming is not required by law or to furnish other services or merchandise including embalming, without having first obtained from the customer explicit written or oral authorization; b. to obtain custody of a deceased human body without having first received from the customer explicit written or oral authorization; c. to fail to promptly release a body or give information regarding the care or whereabouts of a body upon request of a customer; d. to misrepresent cremation needs including requiring a customer who expresses an interest in immediate cremation of deceased human remains to purchase a casket, or claiming expressly or impliedly that a casket is required by law, or failing to make available to such customer an alternative container; e. to misrepresent the law, public health necessity or religious requirements including the legal and health necessities for embalming, a casket, or an outer interment receptacle; f. to make false preservative value claims, including claiming that decomposition or decay of a deceased human body can be prevented by the use or purchase of embalming, a casket, a burial vault or other outer interment receptacle; g. to charge in excess of the amount advanced, paid or owed to third parties on behalf of customers, or not passing along to the customer any discount, rebate or other benefit received from third parties for any items of service or merchandise described as &quot;cash advances&quot;, &quot;cash disbursements&quot;, &quot;accommodations&quot;, or words of similar import. § 20-734 Merchandise and service selection. § 20-734 Merchandise and service selection. It shall be unlawful for any provider of funeral services: a. to fail to display the three least expensive caskets offered for sale in the same general manner as other caskets are displayed, provided that if fewer than twelve caskets are displayed, only the least expensive casket must be so displayed; or b. to interfere with the customer&apos;s selection of merchandise or services offered for sale including: (1) representing in any manner that any funeral merchandise or service is offered for sale when such is not a bona fide offer to sell said product or services, (2) falsely discouraging any purchase by disparagement, by suggestion that any merchandise or service is not readily available or by defacement, (3) disparaging concern for price by suggestion that a customer&apos;s concern for price or desire to save money on merchandise or services is improper, inappropriate or indicative of a lack of respect or affection for the deceased, (4) contradicting, mitigating or detracting from the printed disclosures required by section 20-732 of this subchapter, or (5) making any claim that is false, misleading or unsubstantiated in a material respect regarding any merchandise or services. § 20-735 Interference with the market. § 20-735 Interference with the market. It shall be unlawful for any provider of funeral services to directly or indirectly prohibit, hinder or restrict, or attempt to prohibit, hinder or restrict: a. the offering or advertising of the availability of low-cost funerals, immediate cremation or other forms of disposition, or arrangement for funeral services in advance of need by any provider of funeral services, memorial society, or other person, partnership, association or corporation; b. any contract or arrangement between a memorial society and any provider of funeral services; c. the disclosure of accurate price information in any manner regarding funeral merchandise or services by any provider of funeral services. § 20-736 Price information over telephone. § 20-736 Price information over telephone. Any provider of funeral services shall, upon request, provide over the telephone,information regarding the range of prices and shall affirmatively disclose the availability of a presentation sheet at the establishment. § 20-737 Regulations. § 20-737 Regulations. The commissioner shall promulgate rules and regulations reasonably necessary to effectuate the purposes of this subchapter. § 20-738 Penalties. § 20-738 Penalties. Violation of any provision of this subchapter shall be punishable by a civil penalty of not less than one hundred nor more than one thousand dollars for each violation. Subchapter 8: Income Tax Preparers Subchapter 8: Income Tax Preparers § 20-739 Definitions. § 20-739 Definitions. 1. For the purposes of this subchapter, the term &quot;tax preparer&quot; or &quot;preparer&quot; means a person, partnership, corporation or other business entity, that for valuable consideration advises or assists or offers to advise or assist in the preparation of income tax returns for another. 2. For the purposes of this subchapter, the term &quot;refund anticipation loan&quot; means any loan a taxpayer may receive against his or her anticipated income tax refund. § 20-740 Disclosure. § 20-740 Disclosure. a. A tax preparer who is required, pursuant to federal, state or local law or regulation, to sign income tax returns as a preparer shall prominently and conspicuously post on the business premises an identification and qualification statement. The statement shall include, but is not limited to, the name of the tax preparer, an address and phone number at which the tax preparer can be contacted throughout the year, and a statement of any qualifications possessed by the tax preparer, which may include a statement of satisfactory completion of an educational or training program in income tax law, theory or practice by the preparer. b. The tax preparer shall provide the consumer with a receipt containing an address and phone number at which the preparer can be contacted throughout the year. Such receipt shall be provided to the consumer after the tax preparer receives payment from the consumer, shall include an itemized list of all charges and fees, and shall be made available to the consumer in physical and electronic form. [ALP S-121] c. Prior to providing services to the consumer, the tax preparer shall provide a consumer with a statement itemizing all charges for services the tax preparer intends to provide to the consumer. The tax preparer shall make such statement available to the consumer in physical and electronic form, and in English and any other language the tax preparer used to communicate with the consumer. The commissioner may designate the size, format, and any required elements of this statement by rule. Such statement shall: [ALP S-121] (1) be signed by the consumer prior to the tax preparer providing services to the consumer; [ALP S-121] (2) include the name, address, and phone number of the tax preparer; [ALP S-121] (3) to the extent applicable, include, without limitation, charges and fees applicable to the consumer for any state or federal tax return or schedule prepared, any factors that will increase the cost of preparing such tax return or schedule, software fees, bank fees, filing fees, any fees related to a refund anticipation loan, refund anticipation check, or any other deferred payment product, and any other charges and fees imposed by the tax preparer; and [ALP S-121] (4) include the total cost for all itemized charges and fees. Where any such charges or fees are estimated, the statement shall include the highest possible total estimate for such services. [ALP S-121] (Am. L.L. 2025/168, 11/28/2025, eff. 5/27/2026) [ALP S-121] § 20-740.1 Consumer bill of rights regarding tax preparers. § 20-740.1 Consumer bill of rights regarding tax preparers. a. No later than the fifteenth of October of each year, the department shall produce and publish in the city record a one page informational flier regarding consumers&apos; rights and laws concerning tax preparers to be called a &quot;consumer bill of rights regarding tax preparers&quot;. The flier shall be in a form which is easily reproducible by photocopy machine and shall contain information including, but not limited to, the following: 1. Postings required by local, state and federal laws, such as price posting, posting of qualifications, and any licenses and permits required for the operation of the business; and 2. Explanations of some of the commonly offered services and industry jargon, such as preparation of short and long federal forms, refund, electronic filing, express mail, direct deposit, refund anticipation loan, &quot;quick,&quot; &quot;instant,&quot; &quot;rapid,&quot; &quot;fast,&quot; fee, and interest; and 3. Basic information on what a tax preparer is and is not required to do for a consumer, such as the preparer&apos;s responsibility to sign a return, that a tax preparer may not be required to accompany a consumer to an audit but the company may have a voluntary policy to accompany consumers to audits; and 4. The telephone numbers of the department for information and complaints; and 5. A statement that the consumer has the right to receive the following information from the tax preparer prior to becoming obligated to compensate such tax preparer for services rendered in connection with filing such consumer&apos;s income tax return with the appropriate governmental agencies: (a) A written list of the refund and tax preparation services offered by the tax preparer; (b) A written estimate of the total costs to the consumer for each refund and tax preparation service offered by the tax preparer. Such an estimate shall include basic filing fees, interest rates, refund anticipation loan processing fees, and any other related fees or charges; (c) A written interest rate estimation for a refund anticipation loan or any other loan services offered by the tax preparer; and (d) For each refund and tax preparation service offered by the tax preparer, a written estimate of the period of time the consumer can reasonably expect to wait for his or her tax refund. b. The department shall publicize the availability of the flier. The department shall provide a copy of the consumer bill of rights regarding tax preparers to any requesting individuals or businesses within fourteen days of such a request and shall, no later than November 1 of each year, send the consumer bill of rights regarding tax preparers to each tax preparer who has been found to be in violation of this subchapter or any other provision of this chapter within the previous calendar year. In addition, each tax preparer subject to this subchapter shall obtain a current consumer bill of rights regarding tax preparers from the department and shall reproduce it so that it is clear and legible. As of January 1 of each year, each such tax preparer shall give to each consumer, free of charge, a current, legible copy of the consumer bill of rights regarding tax preparers prior to any discussion with the consumer. Each such tax preparer shall also verbally direct the consumer to review the consumer bill of rights regarding tax preparers and shall answer any questions the consumer may have about its contents. Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 1991/041 . [ALP S-085] § 20-741 Records. § 20-741 Records. No tax preparer shall intentionally misstate or misrepresent any information relating to his or her education, training or experience on an identification and qualification statement. A tax preparer shall maintain records to substantiate all of the information contained on such a statement; provided, however, that an affidavit signed by the tax preparer indicating that the information contained on a statement is true shall be sufficient to substantiate any information if other records are not available. Such records and/or affidavit shall be kept on file on the business premises and shall be presented on demand for inspection by the commissioner. § 20-741.1 Refund anticipation loans. § 20-741.1 Refund anticipation loans. 1. Any tax preparer who advertises the availability of a refund anticipation loan may not directly or indirectly represent such a loan as a refund. Any advertisement which mentions a refund anticipation loan must state conspicuously that it is a loan and that a fee or interest will be charged by the lending institution. The advertisement must also disclose the name of the lending institution. 2. Before any taxpayer enters into a refund anticipation loan, the tax preparer facilitating such loan shall provide the following disclosure to the taxpayer in writing, in English and Spanish, in at least 14-point type. In the event that the taxpayer does not understand English or Spanish, the tax preparer shall also provide a point-by-point oral explanation of the following required disclosure in a language understood by the tax payer: · YOU ARE NOT REQUIRED TO ENTER INTO THIS REFUND ANTICIPATION LOAN AGREEMENT MERELY BECAUSE YOU HAVE RECEIVED THIS INFORMATION. · IF YOU DO SIGN A CONTRACT FOR A REFUND ANTICIPATION LOAN, YOU WILL BE TAKING OUT A LOAN. YOU WILL BE RESPONSIBLE FOR REPAYMENT OF THE ENTIRE LOAN AMOUNT AND ALL RELATED COSTS AND FEES, REGARDLESS OF HOW MUCH MONEY YOU ACTUALLY RECEIVE IN YOUR TAX REFUND. · IF YOU DO NOT TAKE OUT THIS REFUND ANTICIPATION LOAN, YOU ARE ELIGIBLE TO RECEIVE A GROSS TAX REFUND OF APPROXIMATELY $___ [insert amount]. · IF YOU DO TAKE OUT THIS REFUND ANTICIPATION LOAN, YOU WILL BE RESPONSIBLE TO PAY $___ [insert amount] IN FEES FOR THE LOAN. AFTER THESE FEES ARE PAID, YOU WILL RECEIVE APPROXIMATELY $___ [insert amount] AS YOUR LOAN. · THE ESTIMATED ANNUAL PERCENTAGE RATE OF YOUR REFUND ANTICIPATION LOAN IS [insert amount]%. THIS IS BASED ON THE ACTUAL AMOUNT OF TIME YOU WILL BE LENT MONEY THROUGH THIS REFUND ANTICIPATION LOAN. · IF YOU DO TAKE OUT THIS REFUND ANTICIPATION LOAN, YOU CAN EXPECT TO RECEIVE YOUR LOAN WITHIN APPROXIMATELY TWO BUSINESS DAYS OF [insert date]. · IF YOU DO NOT TAKE OUT THIS REFUND ANTICIPATION LOAN, YOU CAN STILL RECEIVE YOUR TAX REFUND QUICKLY. IF YOU FILE YOUR TAX RETURN ELECTRONICALLY AND RECEIVE YOUR TAX REFUND THROUGH THE MAIL, YOU CAN EXPECT TO RECEIVE YOUR REFUND WITHIN APPROXIMATELY TWO BUSINESS DAYS OF [insert date]. IF YOU FILE YOUR TAX RETURN ELECTRONICALLY AND HAVE YOUR TAX REFUND DIRECTLY DEPOSITED INTO A BANK ACCOUNT, YOU CAN EXPECT TO RECEIVE YOUR REFUND WITHIN APPROXIMATELY TWO BUSINESS DAYS OF [insert date]. It shall be the obligation of the tax preparer to complete the required disclosure accurately with all relevant information for each taxpayer, to provide the required point-by-point oral explanation when necessary, and to ensure that the completed disclosure form is signed by the taxpayer before he or she enters into a refund anticipation loan. § 20-742 Exemptions. § 20-742 Exemptions. Apart from § 20-741.1 and the accompanying penalties as listed in § 20-743 , the provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to: a. An officer or employee of a corporation or business enterprise who, in his or her capacity as such, advises or assists in the preparation of income tax returns relating to such corporation or business enterprise. b. An attorney at law who advises or assists in the preparation of income tax returns in the practice of law and the employees thereof. c. A fiduciary and the employees thereof who advised or assist in the preparation of income tax returns on behalf of the fiduciary estate, the testator, trustee, grantor or beneficiaries thereof. d. A certified public accountant and the employees thereof. e. A public accountant licensed pursuant to the education law and the employees thereof. f. An employee of a governmental unit, agency or instrumentality who advises or assists in the preparation of income tax returns in the performance of his or her official duties. g. An agent enrolled to practice before the internal revenue service pursuant to section 10.4 of subpart A of 31 CFR part 10. § 20-743 Penalties. § 20-743 Penalties. Any person, partnership, corporation or other business entity who violates any provision of this subchapter or any of the regulations promulgated hereunder shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than two hundred fifty dollars nor more than five hundred dollars for the first violation and for each succeeding violation a civil penalty of not less than five hundred dollars nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars; except that a person, partnership, corporation or other business entity shall not be subject to the civil penalty described above for a first-time violation of subdivision a of section 20-740 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, if such person, partnership, corporation or other business entity proves to the satisfaction of the department, within thirty days of the issuance of the notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the violation, that the violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured, shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of presenting proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of any settlement offer made by the department to a person, partnership, corporation or other business entity who has received, for the first time, a notice of violation of subdivision a of section 20-740 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder. The department shall permit such proof to be submitted electronically or in person. A person, partnership, corporation or other business entity may seek review, in the department&apos;s administrative tribunal, of the determination that the person or entity has not submitted proof of a cure within fifteen days of receiving written notification of such determination. [ALP S-067] (Am. L.L. 2021/080, 7/18/2021, eff. 11/15/2021) [ALP S-067] Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2013/153 and L.L. 2021/080 . [ALP S-082] § 20-743.1 Civil cause of action. § 20-743.1 Civil cause of action. Any person claiming to be injured by the failure of a tax preparer to act in accordance with section 20-741.1 of this subchapter shall have a cause of action against such tax preparer in any court of competent jurisdiction for any or all of the following relief: a. compensatory and punitive damages; b. injunctive and declaratory relief; c. attorneys&apos; fees and costs; and d. such other relief as a court may deem appropriate. Subchapter 9: Sale of Travel Tickets [Repealed] Subchapter 9: Sale of Travel Tickets [Repealed] § 20-744 Procurement or sale of tickets, reservations or passenger accommodations. [Repealed] § 20-744 Procurement or sale of tickets, reservations or passenger accommodations. [Repealed] (Repealed L.L. 2023/151, 11/17/2023, eff. 5/15/2024) [ALP S-097] Subchapter 10: Information Regarding Redemption of Beverage Containers Subchapter 10: Information Regarding Redemption of Beverage Containers § 20-745 Definitions. § 20-745 Definitions. For the purposes of this subchapter the following terms shall have the following meanings: a. &quot;Beverage&quot; means any beverage covered by title ten of article twenty-seven of the environmental conservation law of the state of New York; b. &quot;Beverage container&quot; means any can, bottle or other container of any description that is covered by title ten of article twenty-seven of the environmental conservation law of the state of New York; c. &quot;Dealer&quot; means any person engaged in the retail sale, for off-premises consumption of beverages in beverage containers that are covered by title ten of article twenty-seven of the environmental conservation law of the state of New York; d. &quot;Redeemer&quot; means any person, other than a dealer or distributor, who demands the refund value in exchange for an empty beverage container. § 20-746 Sign required. § 20-746 Sign required. Every dealer shall post conspicuously a sign that summarizes the rights and obligations of redeemers pursuant to title ten of article twenty-seven of the environmental conservation law of the state of New York. § 20-747 Regulations. § 20-747 Regulations. The commissioner may adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this subchapter. Such regulations shall include, but not be limited to, defining the contents, size and location of the sign required by section 20-746 of this subchapter. § 20-748 Penalties. § 20-748 Penalties. Violation of this subchapter, or any regulation promulgated pursuant to it, shall be punishable by payment of a civil penalty of one hundred fifty dollars; except that a person shall not be subject to a civil penalty described above for a first-time violation of section 20-746 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder or pursuant to section 20-747 , if such person proves to the satisfaction of the department, within thirty days of the issuance of the notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the violation, that the violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured, shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of presenting proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of any settlement offer made by the department to a person who has received, for the first time, a notice of violation of section 20-746 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder. The department shall permit such proof to be submitted electronically or in person. A person may seek review, in the department&apos;s administrative tribunal, of the determination that the person has not submitted proof of a cure within fifteen days of receiving written notification of such determination. [ALP S-067] (Am. L.L. 2021/080, 7/18/2021, eff. 11/15/2021) [ALP S-067] Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2013/153 and L.L. 2021/080 . [ALP S-082] Subchapter 11: Posting of Prices in Retail Service Establishments Subchapter 11: Posting of Prices in Retail Service Establishments § 20-749 Definitions. § 20-749 Definitions. (a) &quot;Current selling price&quot; means the regular price of a listed service, so that, in the absence of any special offer, the service would be given upon payment of the listed price. (b) &quot;Service&quot; means a basic service performed by a retail service establishment. It also means any special service not commonly offered by such an establishment which the establishment offers to distinguish itself from its competitors. (c) &quot;Retail service establishment&quot; shall mean any establishment which provides services to consumers at retail, and shall include but not be limited to the following: tailors, dry cleaners, laundries, barbers and hair salons, nail salons, shoe and luggage repair shops, locksmiths, electrical or electronic appliance or equipment repair shops, reupholstery or furniture repair shops, tax preparers and photographic film development providers. § 20-750 Display of service prices. § 20-750 Display of service prices. (a) Every retail service establishment must post, at each counter or desk at which orders are placed and/or payment is made, a list conspicuously displaying the current selling price of the basic services provided. The list shall also disclose factors which may cause the price to be higher than the basic price, and the range of the possible additional charges when such variables pertain. (b) In the event of a special sale or promotion, the regular price list shall remain conspicuously visible. c. Notwithstanding any other law, rule or regulation, and in addition to any other penalties provided in this code or elsewhere, the disclosure of differing prices or fees based upon gender by a retail service establishment shall constitute a violation of this subchapter. § 20-751 Disclosure of base prices. § 20-751 Disclosure of base prices. (a) Where the price of the service is calculated on a base fee plus labor and parts as determined by time and cost of materials, the base fee and the cost of labor per common unit of time shall be listed, and the list shall state that the cost of parts will be additional. The list shall also state that warranty information is available on request. (b) Where the cost of service includes the cost of parts, the service establishment shall provide a list of parts actually provided and the cost of each. § 20-752 Regulations. § 20-752 Regulations. (a) The commissioner shall promulgate such regulations as shall be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this subchapter, including, but not limited to requirements as to the manner of display of service prices. (b) The commissioner may, by regulation, permit a printed list to be substituted for a posted list, in such classes of service establishments in which the commissioner determines that it would be impracticable to post because the list is subject to frequent changes, provided that the printed list is given to each customer upon entering the service establishment. § 20-753 Penalties. § 20-753 Penalties. Any person who violates the provisions of this subchapter or the regulations promulgated pursuant to this subchapter shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a civil penalty of fifty dollars for the first offense; one hundred dollars for the second offense; and two hundred fifty dollars for the third offense and any subsequent offense; except that a person shall not be subject to the civil penalty described above for a first-time violation of section 20-750 or 20-751 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder or pursuant to section 20-753 , if such person proves to the satisfaction of the department, within thirty days of the issuance of the notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the violation, that the violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured, shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of presenting proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of any settlement offer made by the department to a person who has received, for the first time, a notice of violation of section 20-750 or 20-751 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder or pursuant to section 20-753 . The department shall permit such proof to be submitted electronically or in person. A person may seek review, in the department&apos;s administrative tribunal, of the determination that the person has not submitted proof of a cure within fifteen days of receiving written notification of such determination. For the purposes of this section, if on any single day the current selling price list is not displayed in accordance with this subchapter or the regulations promulgated pursuant to this subchapter, it shall be considered a single violation. [ALP S-067] (Am. L.L. 2021/080, 7/18/2021, eff. 11/15/2021; Am. L.L. 2021/098, 9/26/2021, eff. 11/15/2021) [ALP S-067] Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2013/153 , L.L. 2021/080 , and L.L. 2021/098 . [ALP S-082] Subchapter 12: Delayed Payment Transactions: Billing Practices [Repealed] Subchapter 12: Delayed Payment Transactions: Billing Practices [Repealed] § 20-755 Definitions. [Repealed] § 20-755 Definitions. [Repealed] (Repealed L.L. 2023/151, 11/17/2023, eff. 5/15/2024) [ALP S-097] § 20-756 Consumer invoices; required disclosure. [Repealed] § 20-756 Consumer invoices; required disclosure. [Repealed] (Repealed L.L. 2023/151, 11/17/2023, eff. 5/15/2024) [ALP S-097] § 20-757 Unsolicited offers. [Repealed] § 20-757 Unsolicited offers. [Repealed] (Repealed L.L. 2023/151, 11/17/2023, eff. 5/15/2024) [ALP S-097] § 20-758 Violations. [Repealed] § 20-758 Violations. [Repealed] (Repealed L.L. 2023/151, 11/17/2023, eff. 5/15/2024) [ALP S-097] Subchapter 13: Tobacco Product Promotion Subchapter 13: Tobacco Product Promotion Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 1998/003 . [ALP S-084] § 20-760 Tobacco product promotion restriction. § 20-760 Tobacco product promotion restriction. a. It shall be unlawful for any person to offer or cause to be offered a tobacco product promotion, as defined in section 27-508.2 of this code, to any person younger than eighteen years of age. b. Any person offering or causing to be offered a tobacco product promotion shall verify through a driver&apos;s license or other photographic identification card issued by a government entity or educational institution that a person to whom a tobacco product promotion has been offered is at least eighteen years of age. Such identification need not be required of any individual who reasonably appears to be at least twenty-five years of age; provided, however, that such appearance shall not constitute a defense in any proceeding alleging the offering of a tobacco product promotion to an individual under eighteen years of age. c. A proceeding to recover any civil penalty pursuant to this subchapter shall be commenced by the service of a notice of violation which shall be returnable to the administrative tribunal of the department. The administrative tribunal of the department shall have the power to impose civil penalties for violation of this subchapter. d. Nothing in this subchapter shall be deemed to prohibit sponsorship of or at events as set forth in section 27-508.5 of this code. Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 1998/003 . [ALP S-084] Subchapter 13-A: Motorized Scooters Subchapter 13-A: Motorized Scooters § 20-762 Motorized scooters. § 20-762 Motorized scooters. a. For purposes of this section, a motorized scooter shall have the definition set forth in section 19-176.2 of this code. b. No person shall sell, lease or rent or attempt to sell, lease or rent a motorized scooter to another person in the city of New York. c. Any person who violates subdivision b of this section shall be liable for a civil penalty of one thousand dollars for a first violation and a civil penalty of two thousand dollars for each subsequent violation within one year. Each sale, lease or rental, or attempt to sell, lease or rent, a motorized scooter shall be deemed a separate violation. Authorized employees of the department, the police department, and of any other agency designated by the mayor, shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this section. Such penalties shall be recovered in a civil action or in a proceeding commenced by the service of a notice of hearing that shall be returnable before the administrative tribunal of the department. In addition, such violation shall be a traffic infraction and shall be punishable in accordance with section eighteen hundred of the New York state vehicle and traffic law. d. Any motorized scooter that has been used or is being used in violation of the provisions of this section may be impounded and shall not be released until any and all removal charges and storage fees and the applicable fines have been paid or a bond has been posted in an amount satisfactory to the commissioner. Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2004/051 . [ALP S-084] Subchapter 14: Domestic Workers and Household Employees Subchapter 14: Domestic Workers and Household Employees Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2003/033 . [ALP S-084] § 20-770 Application. § 20-770 Application. The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all employment agencies, as defined in section 171 of article 11 of the general business law, which arrange employment for domestic or household employees. Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2003/033 . [ALP S-084] § 20-771 Statement of employee rights and employer obligations under city, state and federal law. § 20-771 Statement of employee rights and employer obligations under city, state and federal law. a. Every licensed employment agency under the jurisdiction of the commissioner and engaged in the job placement of domestic or household employees shall provide to each applicant for employment as a domestic or household employee and his or her prospective employer, before job placement is arranged, a written statement indicating the rights of such employee and the obligations of his or her employer under city, state and federal law. Such statement of rights and obligations shall embody provisions of city, state and federal laws that pertain to domestic or household employees, both in their capacity as workers in New York city, New York state and the United States and in their capacity specifically as domestic or household employees in New York city, New York state and the United States. Such statement of rights and obligations shall include, but not be limited to, a general description of employee rights and employer obligations pursuant to laws regarding minimum wage, overtime and hours of work, sick time, days of rest, record keeping, social security payments, unemployment insurance coverage, disability insurance coverage and workers&apos; compensation. Such statement of rights and obligations shall be prepared and distributed by the commissioner to licensed employment agencies over which the commissioner has jurisdiction. b. Every employment agency engaged in the job placement of domestic or household employees shall keep on file in its principal place of business for a period of three (3) years a statement, signed by the employer of a domestic or household employee whom the employment agency has placed with such employer, indicating that the employer has read and understands the statement of rights and obligations he or she received pursuant to subdivision (a) of this section. Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2003/033 and L.L. 2014/007 . [ALP S-084] § 20-772 Statement of job conditions; records. § 20-772 Statement of job conditions; records. a. Every licensed employment agency under the jurisdiction of the commissioner and engaged in the job placement of domestic or household employees shall provide to each applicant for employment as a domestic or household employee a written statement, in a form approved by the commissioner, of the job conditions of each potential employment position to which the agency recommends that the applicant apply. Each such statement shall fully and accurately describe the nature and terms of employment, including the name and address of the person to whom the applicant is to apply for such employment, the name and address of the person authorizing the hiring for such position, wages, hours of work, the kind of services to be performed and agency fee. b. Every employment agency engaged in the job placement of domestic or household employees shall keep on file in its principal place of business for a period of three (3) years a duplicate copy of the written statement of job conditions required by subdivision (a) of this section. Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2003/033 . [ALP S-084] § 20-773 Enforcement. § 20-773 Enforcement. In order to implement and carry out the requirements of this subchapter, the commissioner or his or her duly authorized agent or inspector shall have the same authority as set forth in section 189 of article 11 of the general business law. Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2003/033 . [ALP S-084] § 20-774 Violations. § 20-774 Violations. Any person who violates, and the officers of a corporation and stockholders holding ten percent or more of the stock of a corporation which is not publicly traded, who knowingly permit the corporation to violate, subdivisions (a) and (b) of sections 20-771 and 20- 20-772 of this subchapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars, or imprisonment for not more than one year, or both, by any court of competent jurisdiction. Criminal proceedings based upon violations of such subdivisions may be instituted by the commissioner and/or any persons aggrieved by such violations. Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2003/033 . [ALP S-084] Subchapter 14-A: Immigration Assistance Services Subchapter 14-A: Immigration Assistance Services Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2004/031 . [ALP S-084] § 20-775 Definitions. § 20-775 Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following terms have the following meanings: [ALP S-016] a. &quot;Immigration assistance service&quot; means providing any form of assistance, in the city of New York, for a fee or other compensation, to persons who have come, or plan to come to the United States from a foreign country, or their representatives, in relation to any proceeding, filing or action affecting the non-immigrant, immigrant or citizenship status of a person, which arises under the immigration and nationality law, executive order or presidential proclamation, or which arises under actions or regulations of the United States department of homeland security, the United States department of justice, the United States department of labor, or the United States department of state. [ALP S-016] b. &quot;Provider&quot; means any person, including but not limited to a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, sole proprietorship or natural person, that provides immigration assistance services, but shall not include: [ALP S-016] 1. any person who is a member in good standing of the bar of the highest court of any state, possession, territory, commonwealth or the District of Columbia, and is not under any order of any court suspending, enjoining, restraining, disbarring, or otherwise restricting him or her in the practice of law, or any person working directly under the supervision of the person admitted; [ALP S-016] 2. any tax-exempt, not-for-profit organization that provides immigration assistance services without a fee or other payment from individuals or at nominal fees as defined by the United States department of justice and any employee of such organization acting within the scope of his or her employment; [ALP S-016] 3. any tax-exempt, not-for-profit organization recognized by the United States department of justice that provides immigration assistance services via representatives accredited by the department to appear before the United States citizenship and immigration services and/or executive office for immigration review, that does not charge a fee or charges nominal fees as defined by the department, and any duly accredited employee of such organization acting within the scope of his or her employment; [ALP S-016] 4. any authorized agency under subdivision ten of section three hundred seventy-one of the New York state social services law and the employees of such organization when acting within the scope of such employment; [ALP S-016] 5. any elected official who, acting within the scope of his or her official capacity, without a fee or other payment makes inquiries on behalf of an individual to any governmental authority responsible for administering any program, law or regulation affecting the non-immigrant, immigrant or citizenship status of a person; [ALP S-016] 6. any employee of the office of the mayor or an executive agency of the city of New York who, acting within the scope of his or her capacity as an employee of the office of the mayor or an executive agency of the city of New York, without a fee or other payment makes inquires on behalf of an individual to any governmental authority responsible for administering any program, law or regulation affecting the non-immigrant, immigrant or citizenship status of a person; or [ALP S-016] 7. any individual providing representation in an immigration-related proceeding under federal law for which federal law or regulation establishes such individual&apos;s authority to appear. [ALP S-016] (Am. L.L. 2017/063, 4/25/2017, eff. 8/23/2017) [ALP S-016] Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2004/031 . [ALP S-084] § 20-776 Prohibited conduct. § 20-776 Prohibited conduct. In the course of providing immigration assistance services, no provider may: [ALP S-016] a. State or imply that the provider can or will obtain special favors from or has special influence with any governmental entity, or threaten to report the customer to immigration or other authorities or threaten to undermine in any way the customer&apos;s immigration status or attempt to secure lawful status; [ALP S-016] b. Demand or retain any fees or compensation for services not performed, or costs that are not actually incurred; [ALP S-016] c. Fail to provide a customer with copies of documents submitted to, or received from, a governmental entity within two weeks of submission or receipt or refuse to return original documents supplied by, prepared on behalf of, or paid for by the customer, upon the request of the customer, or upon termination of the contract. Original documents must be returned promptly upon request and upon cancellation of the contract, even if there is a fee dispute between the provider and the customer; [ALP S-016] d. Fail to provide the customer with a signed form affirming receipt of an original document, as well as a complete copy of such document, immediately upon taking possession of such original document for submission or any other purpose; [ALP S-016] e. Assume, use or advertise the title of lawyer or attorney at law, or equivalent terms in the English language or any other language, or represent or advertise other titles or credentials, including but not limited to &quot;Notary Public,&quot; &quot;Accredited Representative of the Board of Immigration Appeals,&quot; &quot;Notario Public,&quot; &quot;Notario Publico,&quot; &quot;Notario,&quot; &quot;Immigration Specialist&quot; or &quot;Immigration Consultant,&quot; that could cause a customer to believe that the person is authorized to provide advice on an immigration matter; provided that a notary public licensed by the secretary of state may use the term &quot;Notary Public&quot;; [ALP S-016] f. Give any legal advice concerning an immigration matter, including selecting, or advising the customer on selecting, a governmental agency form in order to apply for an immigration-related benefit, or otherwise engage in the practice of law; [ALP S-016] g. Make a determination of, or advise about, a person&apos;s immigration status, including advising him or her on how to respond to questions on a governmental form regarding such determination; [ALP S-016] h. Make any guarantee or promise to a customer, unless there is a basis in fact for such representation, such representation does not relate to eligibility for an immigration-related benefit, and the guarantee or promise is in writing and attached to the service contract; [ALP S-016] i. Represent that a fee may be charged, or charge a fee for the distribution, provision or submission of any official document or form issued or promulgated by a state or federal governmental entity; or for a referral of the customer to another person or entity that is qualified to provide services or assistance which the provider will not provide; [ALP S-016] j. Refer, for a fee or other compensation, a customer to an attorney or any other individual or entity that can provide services that such provider cannot provide; [ALP S-016] k. Guarantee the expedition of any immigration-related benefit, pursuant to an actual or fabricated relationship with or access to government employees who have the ability to expedite applications or other documentation, or issue a favorable decision for any reasons other than the merits of such application or documentation; [ALP S-016] l. Provide information to any person about his or her, or his or her family member&apos;s potential eligibility for a particular immigration-related benefit or status, or other governmental benefit, with the intent to induce such person to employ the services of such provider, regardless of whether the information is true or false; [ALP S-016] m. Disclose any information to, or submit any forms or documents with, any third party, including immigration or other authorities, on behalf of or relating to the customer without the knowledge and consent of the customer except where such disclosure or such submission is required by law. A provider shall notify the customer in writing when such provider has disclosed any information to or submitted any form or document with immigration or other authorities when such disclosure or submission was required by law and performed without the knowledge and consent of the customer. [ALP S-016] (Am. L.L. 2017/063, 4/25/2017, eff. 8/23/2017) [ALP S-016] Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2004/031 . [ALP S-084] § 20-777 Written agreement. § 20-777 Written agreement. No immigration assistance services shall be provided until the customer has executed a written contract with the provider. The contract shall be in a language understood by the customer, either alone or with the assistance of an interpreter, and, if that language is not English, an English language version of the contract must also be provided. A copy of the contract shall be provided to the customer immediately upon the customer&apos;s execution of the contract. The interpreter shall provide an attestation affirming the accuracy of the translation, to be attached to the contract. The customer has the right to cancel the contract within three business days after his or her execution of the contract, without fee or penalty. The right to cancel the contract within three days without payment of any fee may be waived when services must be provided immediately to avoid a forfeiture of eligibility or other loss of rights or privileges, and the customer furnishes the provider with a separate dated and signed statement, by the customer or his or her representative, describing the need for services to be provided within three days and expressly acknowledging and waiving the right to cancel the contract within three days. The contract may be cancelled at any time after execution. If the contract is cancelled more than three days after execution, or within three days after execution if the right to cancel without fee has been waived, the provider may retain fees for services rendered, and any additional amounts actually expended on behalf of the customer. All other amounts must be returned to the customer within fifteen days after cancellation. The written contract shall be in plain language, in at least twelve point font and shall include the following: [ALP S-016] 1. The name, address and telephone number of the provider. [ALP S-016] 2. Itemization of all services to be provided to the customer, as well as the fees and costs to be charged to the customer for each service. [ALP S-016] 3. A statement that original documents submitted in connection with an application for an immigration-related benefit made to any governmental entity, may not be retained by the provider for any reason, including the customer&apos;s failure to pay fees or costs. [ALP S-016] 4. A statement that the provider shall give the customer a signed form affirming receipt of each original document, as well as a complete copy of such document, immediately upon taking possession of such original document for submission or any other purpose. [ALP S-016] 5. A statement that the provider shall give the customer a copy of each document prepared with the provider&apos;s assistance. [ALP S-016] 6. A statement that the customer is not required to obtain supporting documents through the provider, and may obtain such documents himself or herself, along with the statement: &quot;The U.S. government provides information on required forms and documentation for free online and by phone.&quot; [ALP S-016] 7. The statement: &quot;You may cancel this contract at any time. You have three (3) business days to cancel this contract without penalty and get back any fees that you have already paid. Notice of cancellation may be made by completing the cancellation form included in this contract, or by otherwise notifying the provider in writing and delivering such form or notification to the provider in person or by United States mail to (specify address). If you cancel this contract you will get back any documents you submitted to the provider.&quot; [ALP S-016] 8. Each contract shall contain a separate final page titled &quot;Cancellation Form.&quot; The cancellation form shall contain the following statement: &quot;I hereby cancel the contract of (date of contract) between (name of provider, address of provider, and phone number of provider) and (name of customer).&quot; Below the statement shall be a customer signature and date line. Below the signature and date line, the form shall contain the statement required by this paragraph, printed in 12 point font or larger. [ALP S-016] 9. A statement that the provider has financial surety in effect for the benefit of any customer in the event that the customer is owed a refund, or is damaged by the actions of the provider, together with the name, address and telephone number of the surety. [ALP S-016] 10. The statement: &quot;The individual providing assistance to you under this contract is not an attorney licensed to practice law or accredited by the United States department of justice to provide representation to you before the federal government or any immigration authority and may not give legal advice or accept fees for legal advice. For a free legal referral call the Office for New Americans hotline at (phone number of the Office for New Americans), the New York State Office of the Attorney General (phone number of the Office of the Attorney General), or your local district attorney or prosecutor.&quot; The provider shall be responsible for providing the most recent and accurate information required by this paragraph. [ALP S-016] 11. The statement: &quot;The individual providing assistance to you under this contract is prohibited from disclosing any of your personal information to, or submitting any forms or documents on your behalf with, immigration or other authorities without your knowledge and consent except as required by law.&quot; A provider shall promptly notify the customer in writing when such provider has disclosed any information to or submitted any form or document with immigration or other authorities when such disclosure or submission was required by law and done without the knowledge and consent of the customer. [ALP S-016] 12. The statement: &quot;A copy of all forms completed and documents accompanying the forms shall be kept by the service provider for three years. A copy of the customer&apos;s file shall be provided to the customer on demand and without fee.&quot; [ALP S-016] 13. On the same page as the signature line, the statement: &quot;The individual providing assistance to you under the terms of this contract must explain the contents of this contract to you and answer any questions you may have regarding the terms of this contract.&quot; [ALP S-016] 14. Each contract shall contain the department&apos;s publicly available &quot;Consumer Bill of Rights&quot; on a separate page. The provider shall be responsible for providing the most recent version of the document available on the department&apos;s website. [ALP S-016] (Am. L.L. 2017/063, 4/25/2017, eff. 8/23/2017) [ALP S-016] Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2004/031 . [ALP S-084] § 20-777.1 Posting of signs. § 20-777.1 Posting of signs. a. A provider must post signs conspicuously at every location where that provider meets with customers. Such signs shall be made available by the department in English and in the top six limited English proficiency languages spoken by the population of New York city as determined by the department of the city planning and the office of the language services coordinator, based on United States census data. Providers shall post such signs in English and in any language in which services are offered by the provider. To the extent the department has made available a sign in a language required to be posted by such provider, such provider must use such sign. There shall be a separate sign for each language, and each sign shall be posted in a location where it will be visible to customers. Such signs shall state the following: &quot;THE INDIVIDUAL PROVIDING ASSISTANCE TO YOU UNDER THIS CONTRACT IS NOT AN ATTORNEY LICENSED TO PRACTICE LAW OR ACCREDITED BY THE UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE TO PROVIDE REPRESENTATION TO YOU BEFORE THE UNITED STATES CITIZENSHIP AND IMMIGRATION SERVICES, THE EXECUTIVE OFFICE FOR IMMIGRATION REVIEW, THE DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY, THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, THE DEPARTMENT OF LABOR, THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE OR ANY IMMIGRATION AUTHORITIES AND MAY NOT GIVE LEGAL ADVICE OR ACCEPT FEES FOR LEGAL ADVICE. FOR A FREE LEGAL REFERRAL CALL THE OFFICE FOR NEW AMERICANS HOTLINE AT (PHONE NUMBER OF THE OFFICE FOR NEW AMERICANS). TO FILE A COMPLAINT ABOUT AN IMMIGRATION ASSISTANCE SERVICE PROVIDER CALL NEW YORK STATE OFFICE FOR NEW AMERICANS AT (PHONE NUMBER OF THE OFFICE FOR NEW AMERICANS), THE NEW YORK STATE OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AT (PHONE NUMBER OF THE OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL), OR YOUR LOCAL DISTRICT ATTORNEY OR PROSECUTOR&apos;S OFFICE AT (PHONE NUMBER OF THE DISTRICT ATTORNEY IN THE COUNTY WHERE THE PROVIDER PROVIDES SERVICES).&quot; The provider shall be responsible for providing the most recent and accurate information required by this section. A separate sign shall be posted in a location visible to customers in conspicuous size font and that contains the schedule of fees for services offered and the statement: &quot;YOU MAY CANCEL ANY CONTRACT WITHIN 3 BUSINESS DAYS AND GET BACK YOUR DOCUMENTS AND ANY MONEY YOU PAID.&quot; [ALP S-016] b. Signs required by this section must be at least 11 inches by 17 inches, in no less than 60 point font. [ALP S-016] (Am. L.L. 2017/063, 4/25/2017, eff. 8/23/2017) [ALP S-016] Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2004/031 . [ALP S-084] § 20-777.2 Advertisements. § 20-777.2 Advertisements. a. Every provider who advertises immigration assistance services by signs, pamphlets, newspapers, images or any other means shall post or otherwise include with the advertisement a notice in English and in the language in which the advertisement appears. The notice must be of a conspicuous size and must state: &quot;The individual offering to provide immigration assistance services is not an attorney licensed to practice law or accredited by the United States department of justice to provide representation before the United States citizenship and immigration services, the executive office for immigration review, the department of homeland security, the department of justice, the department of labor, the department of state or any immigration authorities and may not give legal advice or accept fees for legal advice.&quot; [ALP S-111] b. No advertisement for immigration assistance services may expressly or implicitly guarantee any particular governmental action, including but not limited to the granting of employment authorization, lawful permanent resident status or citizenship. [ALP S-016] (Am. L.L. 2017/063, 4/25/2017, eff. 8/23/2017; Am. L.L. 2025/101, 7/30/2025, eff. 7/30/2025) [ALP S-111] Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2004/031 . [ALP S-084] § 20-778 Document retention. § 20-778 Document retention. Every provider shall retain copies of all documents prepared or obtained in connection with a customer&apos;s request for assistance for a period of three years after a written contract is executed by the provider and the customer, whether or not such contract is subsequently cancelled. [ALP S-016] (Am. L.L. 2017/063, 4/25/2017, eff. 8/23/2017) [ALP S-016] Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2004/031 . [ALP S-084] § 20-779 Surety. § 20-779 Surety. Unless otherwise required by New York state law, every provider must maintain in full force and effect, for the entire period during which the provider provides immigration assistance services and for one year after the provider ceases to do business as a provider of immigration assistance services, a bond, contract of indemnity, or irrevocable letter of credit, payable to the people of the city of New York, in the principal amount of fifty thousand dollars. Such surety shall be for the benefit of any person who does not receive a refund of fees from the provider to which he or she is entitled, or is otherwise injured by the provider. The Commissioner on behalf of the person or the person in his or her own name may maintain an action against the provider and the surety. [ALP S-016] (Am. L.L. 2017/063, 4/25/2017, eff. 8/23/2017) [ALP S-016] Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2004/031 . [ALP S-084] § 20-779.1 Penalties. § 20-779.1 Penalties. a. (1) Criminal Penalties. Any provider who violates any provision of this subchapter shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor. [ALP S-016] (2) Civil Penalties. Any provider of immigration assistance services who violates any provision of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than $5,000 nor more than $10,000 for the first violation and for each succeeding violation a civil penalty of not less than $10,000 nor more than $15,000, except that any provider of immigration assistance services who violates section 20-776 or subdivision b of 20-777.2 of this subchapter, or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than $7,500 nor more than $10,000 for the first violation and for each succeeding violation a civil penalty of not less than $18,000 nor more than $20,000. [ALP S-111] b. A proceeding to recover any civil penalty authorized pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be commenced by the service of a notice of violation that shall be returnable to any tribunal established within the office of administrative trials and hearings. [ALP S-052] (Am. L.L. 2017/063, 4/25/2017, eff. 8/23/2017; Am. L.L. 2020/080, 8/28/2020, eff. 8/28/2020; Am. L.L. 2025/101, 7/30/2025, eff. 7/30/2025) [ALP S-111] Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2004/031 and L.L. 2020/080 . [ALP S-084] § 20-779.2 Civil cause of action. § 20-779.2 Civil cause of action. Any person claiming to be injured by the failure of a provider of immigration assistance services to comply with the provisions of this subchapter shall have a cause of action against such provider of immigration assistance services in any court of competent jurisdiction for any or all of the following relief: [ALP S-016] a. actual compensatory and punitive damages or two thousand five hundred dollars, whichever is greater; [ALP S-016] b. injunctive and declaratory relief; [ALP S-016] c. attorney&apos;s fees and costs; and [ALP S-016] d. such other relief as a court deems appropriate. [ALP S-016] (Am. L.L. 2017/063, 4/25/2017, eff. 8/23/2017) [ALP S-016] Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2004/031 . [ALP S-084] § 20-779.3 Rules. § 20-779.3 Rules. The commissioner may promulgate such rules and regulations as are necessary for the purposes of implementing and carrying out the provisions of this subchapter. Upon a finding by the commissioner that the requirements of state law applicable to providers of immigration services are substantially the same as the requirements of this subchapter, compliance with state law shall be deemed to be compliance with the requirements of this subchapter. [ALP S-016] (Am. L.L. 2017/063, 4/25/2017, eff. 8/23/2017) [ALP S-016] Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2004/031 . [ALP S-084] § 20-779.4 Severability. § 20-779.4 Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or other portion of this subchapter is, for any reason, declared unconstitutional or invalid, in whole or in part, by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed severable, and such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this law, which shall continue in full force and effect. [ALP S-016] (Am. L.L. 2017/063, 4/25/2017, eff. 8/23/2017) [ALP S-016] Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2004/031 . [ALP S-084] § 20-779.5 Reporting. § 20-779.5 Reporting. a. The department shall prepare an annual report relating to providers of immigration services. Such report may be provided in a tabular format and shall include the following: [ALP S-117] 1. Complaints received related to providers of immigration assistance services, and the subject and source of such complaint; [ALP S-117] 2. Inspections conducted by the department, whether the inspection resulted in a violation, and the type of violation issued; [ALP S-117] 3. A description of the department’s efforts to proactively investigate providers of immigration assistance services; [ALP S-117] 4. A description of the department’s efforts to collaborate with other law enforcement agencies on investigation, enforcement, and community education efforts; [ALP S-117] 5. A description of changing trends in the provision of services and common fraudulent schemes; [ALP S-117] 6. Outreach events related to fraud prevention hosted or attended by department staff and for each such event, the number of staff hours dedicated to the event, the number of staff in attendance, the date, time, borough, council district, and zip code of the event; and [ALP S-117] 7. A description of the community outreach and education conducted by the department, including but not limited to the duration, languages, and costs relating to such outreach and education efforts. [ALP S-117] b. Such report shall be published on the department’s website and submitted to the mayor, the speaker of the city council, and the public advocate no later than July 1 of each year, and shall include the information required by subdivision a of this section as it relates to the 12 month period prior to the submission of such report. [ALP S-117] (L.L. 2017/063, 4/25/2017, eff. 8/23/2017; Am. L.L. 2025/097, 7/30/2025, eff. 1/26/2026) [ALP S-117] § 20-779.6 Community outreach and education. § 20-779.6 Community outreach and education. a. In coordination with the mayor’s office of immigrant affairs, the mayor’s office of ethnic and community media, and other appropriate agencies, the department shall engage in community outreach and education efforts to raise awareness about topics including but not limited to common fraudulent schemes committed by providers of immigration assistance services and the department’s complaint mechanisms and services. Outreach shall include information about immigration-related legal assistance, services offered by the city, and how to access such services. [ALP S-117] b. Outreach materials shall identify common fraudulent schemes committed by providers of immigration assistance services and provide information about how to avoid common fraudulent schemes. [ALP S-117] c. The department shall conduct community outreach and education efforts via targeted media channels, including but not limited to internet and subway advertisements. Outreach materials shall be posted and distributed in public places, including but not limited to IDNYC registration sites, humanitarian emergency response and relief centers, asylum seeker resource navigation centers, public schools, and shelters or other facilities administered by city agencies for the provision of social services. [ALP S-117] d. Outreach materials shall be available in all designated citywide languages, as defined in section 23-1101 , and all temporary languages identified pursuant to section 23-1105 . [ALP S-117] (L.L. 2017/063, 4/25/2017, eff. 8/23/2017; Am. L.L. 2025/097, 7/30/2025, eff. 1/26/2026) [ALP S-117] § 20-779.7 Consumer bill of rights. § 20-779.7 Consumer bill of rights. a. In conjunction with the mayor&apos;s office of immigrant affairs, the department shall create a &quot;Consumer Bill of Rights&quot; for customers seeking assistance from providers of immigration assistance services. Such bill of rights shall be posted on the department&apos;s website in English, as well as in the top six limited English proficiency languages spoken by the population of New York city as determined by the department of the city planning and the office of the language services coordinator, based on United States census data. [ALP S-016] (L.L. 2017/063, 4/25/2017, eff. 8/23/2017) [ALP S-016] Subchapter 15: Payday Loans* Subchapter 15: Payday Loans* * Editor&apos;s note: there are two subchapters designated as Subchapter 15. [ALP S-026] Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2005/015 . [ALP S-084] § 20-780 Definitions. § 20-780 Definitions. a. &quot;Person&quot; shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, trust, association, corporation or other legal entity. This term shall not include any individual, firm, partnership, trust, association, corporation or other legal entity that accepts federally insured deposits, such as national banks, state-chartered banks, or savings and loan associations, or any individual, firm, partnership, trust, association, corporation or other legal entity regulated by or subject to the rules and regulations of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or Office of Thrift Supervision of the Department of the Treasury. b. &quot;Payday loan,&quot; also known as, among other terms, &quot;deferred deposit advances,&quot; &quot;cash on demand&quot; or &quot;cash advance,&quot; shall mean any transaction in which funds are provided to a consumer for a limited time period in exchange for (i) a consumer&apos;s personal check or share draft, in the amount of the funds provided to the consumer plus a fee, where presentment or negotiation of such check or share draft is deferred by agreement of the parties until a designated future date; or (ii) a consumer&apos;s authorization to debit the consumer&apos;s transaction account, in the amount of the funds provided to the consumer plus a fee, where such account will be debited on or after a designated future date. Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2005/015 . [ALP S-084] § 20-781 Disclosure of loan information. § 20-781 Disclosure of loan information. Before any consumer enters into a payday loan, the person offering, providing, or facilitating such loan shall provide to the consumer in writing all disclosure required pursuant to the federal Truth in Lending Act in addition to the following disclosure, in English and Spanish, in at least 20-point type: · YOU ARE NOT REQUIRED TO ENTER INTO THIS PAYDAY LOAN AGREEMENT MERELY BECAUSE YOU HAVE RECEIVED THIS INFORMATION. · IF YOU DO SIGN A CONTRACT FOR A PAYDAY LOAN, YOU WILL BE TAKING OUT A LOAN. YOU WILL BE RESPONSIBLE FOR REPAYMENT OF THE ENTIRE LOAN AMOUNT AND ALL RELATED COSTS AND FEES. · IF YOU CANNOT PAY OFF THIS LOAN IN FULL, THE LENDER MIGHT NOT PERMIT YOU TO MAKE A PARTIAL PAYMENT. IN THAT SITUATION, YOU MAY BE REQUIRED TO TAKE OUT AN ADDITIONAL PAYDAY LOAN TO PAY OFF YOUR INITIAL DEBT. · EACH TIME YOU EXTEND THIS PAYDAY LOAN OR TAKE OUT AN ADDITIONAL PAYDAY LOAN, YOU WILL BE CHARGED ADDITIONAL COSTS AND FEES. · IF YOU DO TAKE OUT THIS PAYDAY LOAN, YOU WILL BE RESPONSIBLE TO PAY $___ [insert amount] IN FINANCE CHARGES FOR THE LOAN. AFTER THESE FINANCE CHARGES ARE PAID, YOU WILL RECEIVE APPROXIMATELY $___ [insert amount] AS YOUR LOAN. · THE ESTIMATED ANNUAL PERCENTAGE RATE OF YOUR PAYDAY LOAN IS [insert amount]%. THIS IS THE COST OF YOUR CREDIT AT A YEARLY RATE. It shall be the obligation of the person offering, providing, or facilitating the payday loan to complete the required disclosure accurately with all relevant information for each consumer and to ensure that the completed disclosure form is signed by the consumer before he or she enters into the payday loan. Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2005/015 . [ALP S-084] § 20-782 Consumer information. § 20-782 Consumer information. Not later than the first day of February of the year two thousand and five and on a quarterly basis thereafter, not later than February first, May first, August first, and November first of each year, any person offering, providing, or facilitating a payday loan in New York city shall submit to the department and the council the residential zipcode of each consumer who lives within the city boundaries and has entered into a payday loan during the immediately preceding quarter. [ALP S-052] (Am. L.L. 2020/080, 8/28/2020, eff. 8/28/2020) [ALP S-052] Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2005/015 and L.L. 2020/080 . [ALP S-084] § 20-783 Penalties. § 20-783 Penalties. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this subchapter shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than two hundred fifty dollars nor more than one thousand dollars for each violation. Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2005/015 . [ALP S-084] § 20-784 Hearing authority. § 20-784 Hearing authority. (1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the department shall be authorized upon due notice and hearing, to impose civil penalties for the violation of any provision of this subchapter. The department shall have the power to render decisions and orders and to impose civil penalties not to exceed the amounts specified in section 20-783 of this subchapter for each such violation. All proceedings authorized pursuant to this subdivision shall be conducted in accordance with rules promulgated by the commissioner. The remedies and penalties provided for in this subdivision shall be in addition to any other remedies or penalties provided for the enforcement of such provisions under any other law including, but not limited to, civil or criminal actions or proceedings. (2) All such proceedings shall be commenced by the service of a notice of violation returnable to the administrative tribunal of the department. The commissioner shall prescribe the form and wording of notices of violation. The notice of violation or copy thereof when filled in and served shall constitute notice of the violation charged, and, if sworn to or affirmed, shall be prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein. Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2005/015 . [ALP S-084] Subchapter 15: Disclosure of Information by Child Care Facilities* [Repealed] Subchapter 15: Disclosure of Information by Child Care Facilities* [Repealed] * Editor&apos;s note: there are two subchapters designated as Subchapter 15. [ALP S-026] § 20-800 Definitions. [Repealed] § 20-800 Definitions. [Repealed] (Repealed L.L. 2023/151, 11/17/2023, eff. 5/15/2024) [ALP S-097] § 20-801 Posting of information. [Repealed] § 20-801 Posting of information. [Repealed] (Repealed L.L. 2023/151, 11/17/2023, eff. 5/15/2024) [ALP S-097] § 20-802 Informational materials. [Repealed] § 20-802 Informational materials. [Repealed] (Repealed L.L. 2023/151, 11/17/2023, eff. 5/15/2024) [ALP S-097] § 20-803 Notice of violations. [Repealed] § 20-803 Notice of violations. [Repealed] (Repealed L.L. 2023/151, 11/17/2023, eff. 5/15/2024) [ALP S-097] § 20-804 Penalties. [Repealed] § 20-804 Penalties. [Repealed] (Repealed L.L. 2023/151, 11/17/2023, eff. 5/15/2024) [ALP S-097] § 20-805 Rules. [Repealed] § 20-805 Rules. [Repealed] (Repealed L.L. 2023/151, 11/17/2023, eff. 5/15/2024) [ALP S-097] § 20-806 Severability. [Repealed] § 20-806 Severability. [Repealed] (Repealed L.L. 2023/151, 11/17/2023, eff. 5/15/2024) [ALP S-097] Subchapter 16: Tenant Screening Report Disclosure Subchapter 16: Tenant Screening Report Disclosure § 20-807 Definitions. § 20-807 Definitions. For purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply: a. &quot;Application information&quot; means all information any prospective tenant or tenants is/are required to provide in connection with renting or leasing residential real property, the purpose of which is to gather information about such prospective tenant or tenants, including, but not limited to personal information such as names, addresses, contact information, social security numbers, employment history, rental history or other information pertinent to entering into a real estate tenancy agreement. b. &quot;Consumer reporting agency&quot; means any person who, for monetary fees, dues, or on a cooperative nonprofit basis, regularly engages in whole or in part in the practice of assembling or evaluating consumer credit information or other information on consumers for the purpose of furnishing consumer reports, tenant screening reports or other investigative consumer reports to third parties. c. &quot;Person&quot; means any natural person, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or association. d. &quot;Tenant screening report&quot; means any written, oral, or other communication of any information by a consumer reporting agency bearing on a consumer&apos;s credit worthiness, credit standing, credit capacity, character, general reputation, personal characteristics, history of contact with any housing, civil or criminal court of any state, or mode of living, which is used or expected to be used or collected in whole or part for the purpose of serving as a factor in establishing a consumer&apos;s suitability for housing. § 20-808 Disclosure. § 20-808 Disclosure. a. Any person who requests application information directly from a prospective tenant or tenants or such tenant(s)&apos; agent or agents shall disclose to the prospective tenant or tenants the following: (i) either: (1) that the application information provided by the prospective tenant or tenants may be used to obtain a tenant screening report and the name and address of the consumer reporting agency or agencies which will be used to obtain such report, or (2) that the application information provided will not be used to obtain a tenant screening report and that the person requesting such information, and his or her agent(s), do not use tenant screening reports to determine a prospective tenant or tenants&apos; suitability for housing; and (ii) that pursuant to federal and state law: (1) if the person requesting the information takes adverse action against a prospective tenant or tenants on the basis of information contained in a tenant screening report, such person must notify the tenant that such action was taken and supply the name and address of the consumer reporting agency that provided the tenant screening report on the basis of which such action was taken; (2) any prospective tenant against whom adverse action was taken based on information contained in a tenant screening report has the right to inspect and receive a free copy of such report by contacting the consumer reporting agency; (3) every tenant or prospective tenant is entitled to one free tenant screening report from each national consumer reporting agency annually, in addition to a credit report that should be obtained from www.annualcreditreport.com and (4) every tenant or prospective tenant may dispute inaccurate or incorrect information contained in a tenant screening report directly with the consumer reporting agency. b. If application information is requested in writing, the statements required by subdivision a of this section shall be in writing, located immediately adjacent to where personal information is requested, and set off in a box and printed in a color that sharply contrasts with the print surrounding it. If application information is requested orally, the person requesting such information shall provide written copies of the statements required by subdivision a of this section. § 20-809 Posting of signs. § 20-809 Posting of signs. a. Any person requesting application information from a prospective tenant or tenants shall post a sign, the form and manner of which shall be determined by rule of the commissioner, in any location at which the principal purpose is conducting business transactions pertaining to the rental of residential real estate properties. Such sign shall be posted in a location visible to potential subjects of such reports and shall disclose in conspicuous size type the name and address of all consumer reporting agencies used. Such sign shall also contain a statement that consumers are entitled to one free tenant screening report from each consumer reporting agency annually and may dispute inaccurate or incorrect information contained in such tenant screening report directly with the consumer reporting agency. b. A person requesting application information who has the right to rent or lease housing units in one building with five or fewer housing units that is owned and occupied by such person shall not be required to post a sign pursuant to subdivision a of this section in such building. § 20-810 Violations. § 20-810 Violations. A person violating sections 20-808 or 20-809 of this subchapter shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than two hundred fifty dollars nor more than five hundred dollars for the first violation; except that a person shall not be subject to the civil penalty described above for a first-time violation of section 20-809 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, if such person proves to the satisfaction of the department, within thirty days of the issuance of the notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the violation, that the violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured, shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of presenting proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of any settlement offer made by the department to a person who has received, for the first time, a notice of violation of section 20-809 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder. The department shall permit such proof to be submitted electronically or in person. A person may seek review, in the department&apos;s administrative tribunal, of the determination that the person has not submitted proof of a cure within fifteen days of receiving written notification of such determination. [ALP S-067] (Am. L.L. 2021/080, 7/18/2021, eff. 11/15/2021) [ALP S-067] Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2013/153 and L.L. 2021/080 . [ALP S-082] § 20-811 Hearing authority. § 20-811 Hearing authority. a. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the department shall be authorized, upon due notice and hearing, to impose civil penalties for the violation of any provision of this subchapter and any rules promulgated thereunder. The department shall have the power to render decisions and orders and to impose civil penalties not to exceed the amounts specified in section 20-810 of this subchapter for each such violation. All proceedings authorized pursuant to this section shall be conducted in accordance with rules promulgated by the commissioner. The penalties provided for in section 20-810 of this subchapter shall be in addition to any other remedies or penalties provided for the enforcement of such provisions under any other law including, but not limited to, civil or criminal actions or proceedings. b. All proceedings under this subchapter shall be commenced by the service of a notice of violation returnable to the administrative tribunal of the department. The commissioner shall prescribe the form and wording of notices of violation. The notice of violation or copy thereof when filled in and served shall constitute notice of the violation charged, and, if sworn to or affirmed, shall be prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein. Subchapter 17: Pregnancy Services Centers Subchapter 17: Pregnancy Services Centers Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2011/017 . [ALP S-082] § 20-815 Definitions. § 20-815 Definitions. For the purposes of this subchapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: a. &quot;Abortion&quot; shall mean the termination of a pregnancy for purposes other than producing a live birth, which includes but is not limited to a termination using pharmacological agents. b. &quot;Client&quot; shall mean an individual who is inquiring about or seeking services at a pregnancy services center. c. &quot;Emergency contraception&quot; shall mean one or more prescription drugs used separately or in combination, to prevent pregnancy, when administered to or self-administered by a patient, within a medically recommended amount of time after sexual intercourse, and dispensed for that purpose in accordance with professional standards of practice and determined by the United States food and drug administration to be safe. d. &quot;Health information&quot; shall mean any oral or written information in any form or medium that relates to health insurance and/or the past, present or future physical or mental health or condition of a client. e. &quot;Licensed medical provider&quot; shall mean a person licensed or otherwise authorized under the provisions of articles one hundred thirty-one, one hundred thirty-one-a, one hundred thirty-one-b, one hundred thirty-nine or one hundred forty of the education law of New York, to provide medical services. f. &quot;Personal information&quot; shall mean any or all of the following: the name, address, phone number, email address, date of birth, social security number, driver&apos;s license number or non-driver photo identification card number of a client, a relative of a client or a sexual partner of a client. This term shall apply to all such data, notwithstanding the method by which such information is maintained. g. &quot;Pregnancy services center&quot; shall mean a facility, including a mobile facility, the primary purpose of which is to provide services to women who are or may be pregnant, that either: (1) offers obstetric ultrasounds, obstetric sonograms or prenatal care; or (2) has the appearance of a licensed medical facility. Among the factors that shall be considered in determining whether a facility has the appearance of a licensed medical facility are the following: the pregnancy services center (a) offers pregnancy testing and/or pregnancy diagnosis; (b) has staff or volunteers who wear medical attire or uniforms; (c) contains one or more examination tables; (d) contains a private or semi-private room or area containing medical supplies and/or medical instruments; (e) has staff or volunteers who collect health insurance information from clients; and (f) is located on the same premises as a licensed medical facility or provider or shares facility space with a licensed medical provider. It shall be prima facie evidence that a facility has the appearance of a licensed medical facility if it has two or more of the factors listed in subparagraphs (a) through (f) of paragraph (2) of this subdivision. A pregnancy services center shall not include a facility that is licensed by the state of New York or the United States government to provide medical or pharmaceutical services or where a licensed medical provider is present to directly provide or directly supervise the provision of all services described in this subdivision that are provided at the facility. h. &quot;Premises&quot; shall mean land and improvements or appurtenances or any part thereof. i. &quot;Prenatal care&quot; shall mean services consisting of physical examination, pelvic examination or clinical laboratory services provided to a woman during pregnancy. Clinical laboratory services refers to the microbiological, serological, chemical, hematological, biophysical, cytological or pathological examination of materials derived from the human body, for purposes of obtaining information, for the diagnosis, prevention, or treatment of disease or the assessment of health condition. Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2011/017 . [ALP S-082] § 20-816 Required disclosures. § 20-816 Required disclosures. a. A pregnancy services center shall disclose to a client that the New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene encourages women who are or who may be pregnant to consult with a licensed medical provider. b. A pregnancy services center shall disclose if it does or does not have a licensed medical provider on staff who provides or directly supervises the provision of all of the services at such pregnancy services center. c. A pregnancy services center shall disclose if it does or does not provide or provide referrals for abortion. d. A pregnancy services center shall disclose if it does or does not provide or provide referrals for emergency contraception. e. A pregnancy services center shall disclose if it does or does not provide or provide referrals for prenatal care. f. The disclosures required by this section must be provided: (1) in writing, in English and Spanish in a size and style as determined in accordance with rules promulgated by the commissioner on (i) at least one sign conspicuously posted in the entrance of the pregnancy services center; (ii) at least one additional sign posted in any area where clients wait to receive services; and (iii) in any advertisement promoting the services of such pregnancy services center in clear and prominent letter type and in a size and style to be determined in accordance with rules promulgated by the commissioner; and (2) orally, whether by in person or telephone communication, upon a client or prospective client request for any of the following services: (i) abortion; (ii) emergency contraception; or (iii) prenatal care. Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2011/017 . [ALP S-082] § 20-817 Confidentiality of health and personal information. § 20-817 Confidentiality of health and personal information. a. All health information and personal information provided by a client in the course of inquiring about or seeking services at a pregnancy services center shall be treated as confidential and not disclosed to any other individual, company or organization unless such client, in writing, requests or consents to the release of such information, or disclosure is required by operation of law or court order. b. Any consent for the release of health or personal information required pursuant to subdivision a of this section must: (1) be in writing, dated and signed by the client; (2) identify the nature of the information to be disclosed; (3) identify the name and institutional affiliation of the person or class of persons to whom the information is to be disclosed; (4) identify the organization or individual who is to make the disclosure; (5) identify the client; (6) contain an expiration date or an expiration event that relates to the client or the purpose of the use or disclosure. c. Any client that consents to the release of health or personal information pursuant to subdivision b of this section must have a clear and complete understanding of the nature of such release and the content of such information. d. Notwithstanding subdivisions a and b of this section, if any pregnancy services center employee or volunteer has reasonable cause to suspect that a client receiving services at a pregnancy services center is an abused or maltreated child, such employee or volunteer may report such abuse to the statewide central register of child abuse and maltreatment in accordance with section four-hundred thirteen or four-hundred fourteen of the social services law of New York, and to the administration for children&apos;s services, and/or the police department, and cooperate in the investigation related thereto to the extent permitted by applicable state and federal law. For the purposes of this subdivision, &quot;abused child&quot; and &quot;maltreated child&quot; shall be defined in accordance with section four-hundred twelve of the social services law of New York, or as a person under the age of eighteen whose parent or guardian legally responsible for such person&apos;s care inflicts serious physical injury upon such person, creates a substantial risk of serious physical injury, or commits an act of sexual abuse against such person. Reporting child abuse and maltreatment as defined in this subdivision to an individual or entity other than the statewide central registrar of child abuse and maltreatment, the administration for children&apos;s services or the police department shall be a violation of this section. Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2011/017 . [ALP S-082] § 20-818 Penalties. § 20-818 Penalties. a. Any pregnancy services center that violates the provisions of sections 20-816 or 20-817 of this subchapter or any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than two hundred dollars nor more than one thousand dollars for the first violation and a civil penalty of not less than five hundred dollars nor more than two thousand-five hundred dollars for each succeeding violation. b. (1) If any pregnancy services center is found to have violated the provisions of section 20-816 on three or more separate occasions within two years, then, in addition to imposing the penalties set forth in subdivision a of this section, the commissioner, after notice and a hearing, shall be authorized to order that the pregnancy services center be sealed for a period not to exceed five consecutive days, except that such premises may be entered with the permission of the commissioner solely for actions necessary to remedy past violations of section 20-816 or prevent future violations or to make the premises safe. For the purposes of this subdivision, any violations at a pregnancy services center shall not be included in determining the number of violations of any subsequently established pregnancy services center at that location unless the commissioner establishes that the subsequent operator of such pregnancy services center acquired the premises or pregnancy services center, in whole or in part, for the purpose of permitting the previous operator of the pregnancy services center who had been found guilty of violating section 20-816 of this subchapter to avoid the effect of such violations. (2) Orders of the commissioner issued pursuant to paragraph one of this subdivision shall be posted at the premises that are the subject of the order(s). (3) Ten days after the posting of an order issued pursuant to paragraph one of this subdivision, and upon the written directive of the commissioner, officers and employees of the department and officers of the New York city police department are authorized to act upon and enforce such orders. (4) A closing directed by the department pursuant to paragraph one of this subdivision shall not constitute an act of possession, ownership or control by the city of the closed premises. (5) Mutilation or removal of a posted order of the commissioner or his designee shall be punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding fifteen days, or both, provided such order contains therein a notice of such penalty. Any other intentional disobedience or resistance to any provision of the orders issued pursuant to paragraph one of this subdivision, including using or occupying or permitting any other person to use or occupy any premises ordered closed without the permission of the department as described in subdivision b shall, in addition to any other punishment prescribed by law, be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both. c. For the purposes of this section, all violations committed on any one day by any one pregnancy services center shall constitute a single violation. Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2011/017 . [ALP S-082] § 20-819 Hearing authority. § 20-819 Hearing authority. a. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the department shall be authorized, upon due notice and hearing, to impose civil penalties for the violation of the provisions of this subchapter and any rules promulgated thereunder. The department shall have the power to render decisions and orders and to impose civil penalties not to exceed the amounts specified in section 20-818 of this subchapter for each such violation. All proceedings authorized pursuant to this section shall be conducted in accordance with rules promulgated by the commissioner. The penalties provided for in section 20-818 of this subchapter shall be in addition to any other remedies or penalties provided for the enforcement of such provisions under any other law including, but not limited to, civil or criminal actions or proceedings. b. All proceedings under this subchapter shall be commenced by the service of a notice of violation returnable to the administrative tribunal of the department. Notice of any third violation for engaging in a violation of section 20-816 shall state that premises may be ordered sealed after a finding of a third violation. The commissioner shall prescribe the form and wording of notices of violation. The notice of violation or copy thereof when filled in and served shall constitute notice of the violation charged, and, if sworn to or affirmed, shall be prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein. Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2011/017 . [ALP S-082] § 20-820 Civil cause of action. § 20-820 Civil cause of action. Any person claiming to be injured by the failure of a pregnancy services center to comply with section 20-817 shall have a cause of action against such pregnancy services center in any court of competent jurisdiction for any or all of the following remedies: compensatory and punitive damages; injunctive and declaratory relief; attorney&apos;s fees and costs; and such other relief as a court deems appropriate. Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2011/017 . [ALP S-082] Subchapter 18: Prohibition on the Sale of Expired Over-the-Counter Medication Subchapter 18: Prohibition on the Sale of Expired Over-the-Counter Medication § 20-821 Definitions. § 20-821 Definitions. For purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply: a. &quot;Over-the-counter medication&quot; means a drug, as defined by section 71.03 (b) of the New York city health code, which does not require a prescription. b. &quot;Person&quot; means any natural person, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or association. § 20-822 Prohibited conduct and violations. § 20-822 Prohibited conduct and violations. a. It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale, any over-the-counter medication, later than the date, if any, marked upon the label as indicative of the date beyond which the contents cannot be expected to be safe and effective. b. Violations. A person violating section 20-822 of this subchapter shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred and fifty dollars for the first violation and a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars for any subsequent violation. In addition to such penalties, any person who violates this section shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than one hundred dollars nor more than two hundred and fifty dollars for the first violation and of not less than two hundred and fifty dollars nor more than five hundred dollars for each subsequent violation. For purposes of this subdivision, each group of identical over-the-counter medication subject to this subchapter marked with the same date shall constitute a single violation. However, where the expired over-the-counter medication is sold to a person, each sale shall constitute a separate violation under this section. Penalties shall be enforced in accordance with subdivision g of section twenty-two hundred and three of the charter of the city of New York. § 20-823 Enforcement. § 20-823 Enforcement. The department, the police department, and other agencies designated by the commissioner are authorized to enforce the provisions of this subchapter. Subchapter 19: Conversion Therapy Prohibition [Repealed] Subchapter 19: Conversion Therapy Prohibition [Repealed] § 20-824 Definitions. [Repealed] § 20-824 Definitions. [Repealed] (L.L. 2018/022, 12/31/2017, eff. 4/30/2018; Repealed L.L. 2019/188, 10/26/2019, retro eff. 9/12/2019) [ALP S-043] § 20-825 Prohibited conduct. [Repealed] § 20-825 Prohibited conduct. [Repealed] (L.L. 2018/022, 12/31/2017, eff. 4/30/2018; Repealed L.L. 2019/188, 10/26/2019, retro eff. 9/12/2019) [ALP S-043] § 20-826 Enforcement. [Repealed] § 20-826 Enforcement. [Repealed] (L.L. 2018/022, 12/31/2017, eff. 4/30/2018; Repealed L.L. 2019/188, 10/26/2019, retro eff. 9/12/2019) [ALP S-043] § 20-827 Rules and regulations. [Repealed] § 20-827 Rules and regulations. [Repealed] (L.L. 2018/022, 12/31/2017, eff. 4/30/2018; Repealed L.L. 2019/188, 10/26/2019, retro eff. 9/12/2019) [ALP S-043] Subchapter 20: Required Disclosures by Bail Bond Agents Subchapter 20: Required Disclosures by Bail Bond Agents § 20-830 Definitions. § 20-830 Definitions. For purposes of this subchapter, the following terms have the following meanings: [ALP S-028] Bail bond business. The term &quot;bail bond business&quot; means any bail or insurance business, as described in subsection a of section 6801 of the insurance law. [ALP S-028] Bail bond agent. The term &quot;bail bond agent&quot; means any individual, corporation, or other entity that acts as an agent or solicitor of a bail bond business in soliciting, negotiating, or effectuating any deposit or bail bond by such bail bond business as referenced in subsection a of section 6802 of the insurance law. [ALP S-028] Designated citywide languages. The term &quot;designated citywide languages&quot; means the top six limited English proficiency languages spoken by the population of the city as determined, by the department of city planning and the office of the language services coordinator. [ALP S-028] Premium or compensation. The term &quot;premium or compensation&quot; means &quot;premium or compensation&quot; as this term is used in section 6804 of the insurance law. [ALP S-028] (L.L. 2018/143, 8/6/2018, eff. 2/2/2019) [ALP S-028] § 20-831 Disclosures related to bail bonds. § 20-831 Disclosures related to bail bonds. a. The department shall produce a consumer bill of rights regarding bail bond agents. The department shall provide the consumer bill of rights in a downloadable format on the department&apos;s website in English and in the designated citywide languages. The consumer bill of rights shall include, but need not be limited to, the following information: [ALP S-028] 1. What bail bond businesses and agents are and how the process of obtaining a bail bond works; [ALP S-028] 2. What a bail bond agent is, and is not, required by law to do for a consumer; [ALP S-028] 3. How to make a complaint regarding a bail bond business or bail bond agent, including the contact information for the city and state agencies to which a complaint may be directed; [ALP S-028] 4. Explanations of the commonly offered services and commonly used industry terms, such as &quot;premium or compensation&quot; and &quot;collateral,&quot; including, but not limited to, the difference between nonrefundable premium or compensation and refundable collateral; [ALP S-028] 5. A list of the maximum premium or compensation that can be charged for giving bail bond or depositing money or property as bail under section 6804 of the insurance law, including examples of the maximum premium or compensation for common bail amounts; [ALP S-028] 6. A statement that a premium or compensation that exceeds the premium or compensation amounts permitted pursuant to section 6804 of the insurance law is illegal; [ALP S-028] 7. That a consumer may negotiate the terms of the bail bond contract and take the contract off the premises where a transaction occurs for review prior to signing; and that the contract shall disclose when collateral is to be returned and under which conditions such collateral may be kept by the bail bond agent; [ALP S-028] 8. That the consumer bill of rights is available upon request in the designated citywide languages; and [ALP S-028] 9. A statement that a consumer may be eligible for refundable cash bail. [ALP S-028] b. A bail bond agent shall post in a conspicuous manner at its business and where transactions are executed, in a size and style to be determined by the commissioner, a sign stating the following: [ALP S-028] 1. The license number of the bail bond agent; [ALP S-028] 2. The registered name of the bail bond agent; [ALP S-028] 3. All addresses and phone numbers registered under the license; and [ALP S-028] 4. The name of any sublicensee registered under the license. [ALP S-028] c. Before entering into a contract with a consumer, a bail bond agent shall produce and distribute to every consumer the consumer bill of rights, a copy of which shall be signed and dated by the consumer, and a flier containing the information described in subdivision b of this section. Such agent shall distribute such consumer bill of rights in English and, if the consumer is a limited English proficient individual who speaks a designated citywide language and such agent knows or reasonably should know that the consumer is such an individual, such agent shall distribute the consumer bill of rights in such language as well. [ALP S-028] d. All receipts and contracts provided to consumers by a bail bond agent shall include: [ALP S-028] 1. The name, license number, address, and phone number of the bail bond agent; [ALP S-028] 2. The amount of the bond, when it will be paid, and the name of the bail bond business that issued the bond; [ALP S-028] 3. A description of the collateral, when such collateral will be returned and under which conditions such collateral may be kept; [ALP S-028] 4. The amount of the premium or compensation; and [ALP S-028] 5. A statement of any money paid to a third party by the consumer and the purpose of such payment. [ALP S-028] e. Each bail bond agent shall provide to each consumer a copy of any document that the consumer signed, including but not limited to, any contract and the consumer bill of rights. [ALP S-028] f. A bail bond agent shall maintain physical or electronic copies of all receipts, contracts and signed copies of the consumer bill of rights for a period of five years and, upon request by the department, make such copies available for inspection in accordance with applicable law. [ALP S-028] g. A bail bond agent shall maintain records of the names of any persons employed or subcontracted to interact with consumers for a period of three years and, upon request by the department, make such records available for inspection in accordance with applicable law. [ALP S-028] (L.L. 2018/143, 8/6/2018, eff. 2/2/2019) [ALP S-028] § 20-832 Disclosure of premium or compensation for bail bond services. § 20-832 Disclosure of premium or compensation for bail bond services. a. A bail bond agent shall post in a conspicuous manner, at the location where transactions are executed, a sign, to be produced by the department and made available online, that shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: [ALP S-028] 1. A list of the maximum premium or compensation that can be charged for giving bail bond or depositing money or property as bail under section 6804 of the insurance law; [ALP S-028] 2. That such premium or compensation represents the maximum amounts, excluding collateral, that a bail bond agent can charge for services; [ALP S-028] 3. That a consumer is entitled to receive and must sign a consumer bill of rights before entering a contract with a bail bond agent; and [ALP S-028] 4. That a consumer may make a complaint to the department or the relevant state agencies as illustrated in the consumer bill of rights. [ALP S-028] b. The department shall make information available to inform consumers of their right to make a complaint to the department or the relevant state agencies when a bail bond agent charges more than the maximum premium or compensation permitted under section 6804 of the insurance law. [ALP S-028] (L.L. 2018/142, 8/6/2018, eff. 2/2/2019) [ALP S-028] § 20-833 Rules. § 20-833 Rules. The department is authorized to promulgate such rules as it deems necessary to implement and enforce the provisions of this subchapter. [ALP S-028] (L.L. 2018/142, 8/6/2018, eff. 2/2/2019) [ALP S-028] § 20-835 Civil penalties. § 20-835 Civil penalties. a. Any person that violates any provision of this subchapter or any rule promulgated pursuant to this subchapter is liable for a civil penalty of not less than $500 nor more than $5,000 for each violation. A proceeding to recover any civil penalty authorized pursuant to this subchapter is returnable to any tribunal established within the office of administrative trials and hearings or within any agency of the city designated to conduct such proceedings. [ALP S-028] b. A bail bond business that is party to a transaction in which a violation occurred shall be liable for any civil penalty imposed on a bail bond agent. [ALP S-028] (L.L. 2018/143, 8/6/2018, eff. 2/2/2019) [ALP S-028] Subchapter 21: Cashless Establishments Prohibited Subchapter 21: Cashless Establishments Prohibited § 20-840 Cashless establishments prohibited. § 20-840 Cashless establishments prohibited. a. Definitions. For purposes of this subchapter, the following terms have the following meanings: [ALP S-046] Cash. The term &quot;cash&quot; means United States coins and currency, including federal reserve notes. Cash does not include foreign currency; any paper instrument other than a federal reserve note, including, but not limited to, any check, bond, or promissory note; or any foreign metal coin. [ALP S-046] Consumer commodity. The term &quot;consumer commodity&quot; means any article, good, merchandise, product or commodity of any kind or class produced, distributed or offered for retail sale for consumption by individuals, or for personal, household or family purposes. [ALP S-046] Food store. The term &quot;food store&quot; means an establishment which gives or offers for sale food or beverages to the public for consumption or use on or off the premises, or on or off a pushcart, stand or vehicle. [ALP S-046] Retail establishment. The term &quot;retail establishment&quot; means an establishment wherein consumer commodities are sold, displayed or offered for sale, or where services are provided to consumers at retail. This definition does not include banks or trust companies as those terms are defined in section 2 of article 1 of the banking law. [ALP S-046] b. It shall be unlawful for a food store or a retail establishment to refuse to accept payment in cash from consumers, provided that such food store or retail establishment may refuse to accept payment: [ALP S-046] 1. In cash bills denominated above $20; or [ALP S-046] 2. In cash for any telephone, mail, or internet-based transaction, unless the payment for such transaction takes place on the premises of such food store or retail establishment. [ALP S-046] c. No food store or retail establishment shall charge a higher price for the same consumer commodity to a consumer who pays in cash than to a consumer who pays for such commodity through a cash-less transaction. [ALP S-046] d. A food store or retail establishment that violates this section is liable for a civil penalty of not more than $1,000 for the first violation and a civil penalty of not more than $1,500 for each subsequent violation. [ALP S-046] e. 1. This subchapter shall not apply to a food store or retail establishment that provides a device on premises that converts cash, without charging a fee or requiring a minimum deposit amount greater than one dollar, into a prepaid card that allows a consumer to complete a transaction at such food store or retail establishment. [ALP S-046] 2. Upon request, such device shall provide each consumer with a receipt indicating the amount of cash such consumer deposited onto the prepaid card. [ALP S-046] 3. Cash deposits onto such a prepaid card shall not be subject to an expiration date and there shall be no limit on the number of transactions that may be completed on such prepaid card. [ALP S-046] 4. In the event that such device malfunctions, the food store or retail establishment where such device is located shall accept payment in cash from consumers throughout the time period in which such device does not function in accordance with the standards set forth in this subchapter. Such food store or retail establishment shall place a conspicuous sign on or immediately adjacent to such device indicating that such food store or retail establishment is required by law to accept cash if such device malfunctions, and that consumers may report any violation to 311. The department may establish by rule additional requirements relating to such signs and the display of such signs. [ALP S-046] (L.L. 2020/034, 2/23/2020, eff. 11/19/2020) [ALP S-046] Subchapter 22: Third-Party Food Delivery Services [Repealed] Subchapter 22: Third-Party Food Delivery Services [Repealed] Editor&apos;s note: this subchapter was repealed by L.L. 2021/100, 9/26/2021, eff. 1/24/2022. For provisions effective on January 24, 2022, see §§ 20-563 et seq. [ALP S-069] § 20-845 Definitions. [Repealed] § 20-845 Definitions. [Repealed] (L.L. 2020/052, 5/26/2020, eff. 6/2/2020; Am. L.L. 2020/051, 5/26/2020, eff. 6/2/2020; Am. L.L. 2020/088, 9/14/2020, eff. 9/14/2020; Am. L.L. 2021/092, 8/29/2021, eff. 12/27/2021; Repealed L.L. 2021/100, 9/26/2021, eff. 1/24/2022) [ALP S-069] § 20-846 Fees. [Repealed] § 20-846 Fees. [Repealed] (L.L. 2020/052, 5/26/2020, eff. 6/2/2020; Am. L.L. 2020/088, 9/14/2020, eff. 9/14/2020; Am. L.L. 2021/094, 8/29/2021, retro. eff. 8/17/2021; Repealed L.L. 2021/100, 9/26/2021, eff. 1/24/2022) [ALP S-069] § 20-847 Telephone orders. [Repealed] § 20-847 Telephone orders. [Repealed] (L.L. 2020/051, 5/26/2020, eff. 6/2/2020; Am. L.L. 2020/087, 9/14/2020, eff. 9/14/2020; Am. L.L. 2021/093, 8/29/2021, retro. eff. 8/17/2021; Repealed L.L. 2021/100, 9/26/2021, eff. 1/24/2022) [ALP S-069] § 20-847.1 Telephone number listings. [Repealed] § 20-847.1 Telephone number listings. [Repealed] (L.L. 2021/092, 8/29/2021, eff. 12/27/2021; Repealed L.L. 2021/100, 9/26/2021, eff. 1/24/2022) [ALP S-069] § 20-847.2 Unauthorized listings. [Repealed] § 20-847.2 Unauthorized listings. [Repealed] (L.L. 2021/091, 8/29/2021, eff. 12/27/2021; Repealed L.L. 2021/100, 9/26/2021, eff. 1/24/2022) [ALP S-069] § 20-847.3 Customer data. [Repealed] § 20-847.3 Customer data. [Repealed] (L.L. 2021/090, 8/29/2021, eff. 12/27/2021; Repealed L.L. 2021/100, 9/26/2021, eff. 1/24/2022) [ALP S-069] § 20-848 Penalties and enforcement. [Repealed] § 20-848 Penalties and enforcement. [Repealed] (L.L. 2020/052, 5/26/2020, eff. 6/2/2020; Am. L.L. 2020/051, 5/26/2020, eff. 6/2/2020; Am. L.L. 2021/091, 8/29/2021, eff. 12/27/2021; Repealed L.L. 2021/100, 9/26/2021, eff. 1/24/2022) [ALP S-069] Subchapter 23: Hotel Service Disruptions Subchapter 23: Hotel Service Disruptions § 20-850 Definitions. § 20-850 Definitions. For the purposes of this subchapter, the following terms have the following meanings: [ALP S-053] Hotel. The term &quot;hotel&quot; means a transient hotel as defined in section 12-10 of the New York city zoning resolution or any successor provision of such resolution. [ALP S-053] Room. The term &quot;room&quot; means a room available or let out for use or occupancy in a hotel. [ALP S-053] Service disruption. The term &quot;service disruption&quot; means any of the following conditions where such condition substantially affects or is likely to substantially affect any guest&apos;s use of a room or utilization of a hotel service: [ALP S-053] (i) construction work in or directly related to the hotel that creates excessive noise that is substantially likely to disturb a guest, other than construction that is intended to correct an emergency condition or other condition requiring immediate attention; [ALP S-053] (ii) conditions of which the hotel is aware, indicating the presence in the hotel of any infestation by bed bugs, lice or other insects, rodents or other vermin capable of spreading disease or being carried, including on one&apos;s person, if such infestation has not been fully treated within 24 hours of identifying it; [ALP S-053] (iii) the unavailability, for a period of 48 hours or more, of any advertised hotel amenity, including, but not limited to, a pool, spa, shuttle service, internet access, or food and beverage service; [ALP S-053] (iv) the unavailability, for a period of 48 hours or more, of any advertised room appliances or technology, including but not limited to, in-room refrigerators, or internet or Wi-Fi services; [ALP S-053] (v) the unavailability of any advertised or legally required accessibility feature, including, but not limited to, an elevator, wheelchair lift, ramp, or accessible bathroom in such room or in any common area of the hotel; [ALP S-053] (vi) the unavailability for a period of 24 hours or more, of any utility, including, but not limited to, gas, water or electricity when the unavailability affects only the location of the hotel; or [ALP S-053] (vii) any strike, lockout or picketing activity, or other demonstration or event for a calendar day or more at or immediately adjacent to such hotel. [ALP S-053] Third-party vendor. The term &quot;third-party vendor&quot; means a vendor with which a hotel has an arrangement for third-party room reservations, or any other entity that has reserved or entered into an agreement or booking for the use or occupancy of one or more rooms in a hotel in furtherance of the business of reselling such rooms to guests. [ALP S-053] (L.L. 2020/099, 9/28/2020, eff. 1/26/2021) [ALP S-053] Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2020/099 . [ALP S-053] § 20-851 Notification. § 20-851 Notification. a. Within 24 hours of becoming aware of a service disruption, a hotel shall provide notification of such service disruption to each third-party vendor and each guest who has entered into a reservation, booking, or agreement with the hotel or a third-party vendor for the use or occupancy of a room where such service disruption could reasonably affect such room or such guest&apos;s stay or use of a hotel service. Such notification shall also be provided immediately before accepting or entering into any new reservation, booking, or agreement for the use or occupancy of a room or hotel service that could reasonably be affected by such service disruption. Such notification shall also be provided to any current guest who is substantially affected by such service disruption. Where the circumstances of such service disruption make timely notification impracticable, such notification shall be made as soon as practicable. [ALP S-053] b. Such notification shall describe: (i) the nature of the service disruption; and (ii) the extent of the service disruption&apos;s effect on reservations, bookings, or agreements to use or occupy such room or hotel services, including the right to cancel or terminate the reservation, booking, or agreement for the use or occupancy of such room or hotel services without the imposition of any fee, penalty or other charge, as provided in subdivisions c and d of this section. If such notification is included in a communication containing other information, the notification shall be in a significantly larger font and different color than the remainder of the communication. [ALP S-053] c. A hotel shall not impose any fee, penalty or other charge, nor retain any deposit, in the event a guest, prior to checking in, cancels a reservation, booking, or agreement with such hotel for the use or occupancy of a room, where such guest&apos;s stay or room could be substantially affected by a service disruption during such guest&apos;s stay or use of a hotel service, unless the hotel provided prominent and clear notice of such service disruption, pursuant to subdivision b of this section, prior to accepting such reservation, booking, or agreement. [ALP S-053] d. Where a service disruption arises only after any guest of such room has checked in, the hotel shall prominently and clearly notify such guest of such service disruption within 24 hours of becoming aware of such disruption, as provided in subdivision a of this section. Such notification shall specify the rights set forth in this subdivision, pursuant to subdivision b of this section. The guests of such room or hotel service may terminate any reservation, booking, or agreement for the rental of such room or use of a hotel service, and the hotel shall not impose any fee, penalty or other charge for such termination, nor retain any deposit related to any unused portion of the period of the reservation, booking, or agreement following the onset of such service disruption. [ALP S-053] (L.L. 2020/099, 9/28/2020, eff. 1/26/2021) [ALP S-053] Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2020/099 . [ALP S-053] § 20-852 Penalties. § 20-852 Penalties. a. Authorized agents and employees of the department of consumer and worker protection, and of any other agency designated by the mayor, shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this subchapter. [ALP S-053] b. A hotel that violates or causes another person to violate a provision of this subchapter or any rule promulgated pursuant to such subchapter, shall be subject to a civil penalty as follows: [ALP S-053] 1. for the first violation, a civil penalty of $500; [ALP S-053] 2. for the second violation issued for the same offense within a period of two years of the date of the first violation, a civil penalty of $1,000; [ALP S-053] 3. for the third violation issued for the same offense within a period of two years of the date of the first violation, a civil penalty of $2,500; and [ALP S-053] 4. for the fourth and each subsequent violation issued for the same offense within a period of two years of the date of the first violation, a civil penalty of $5,000. [ALP S-053] c. A proceeding to recover any civil penalty pursuant to this section shall be commenced by the service of a summons or notice of violation returnable to the office of administrative trials and hearings. [ALP S-053] (L.L. 2020/099, 9/28/2020, eff. 1/26/2021) [ALP S-053] Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2020/099 . [ALP S-053] § 20-853 Rules. § 20-853 Rules. The department, or any other agency designated by the mayor pursuant to section 20-852 , may promulgate rules in furtherance of the implementation and enforcement of this subchapter. [ALP S-053] (L.L. 2020/099, 9/28/2020, eff. 1/26/2021) [ALP S-053] Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2020/099 . [ALP S-053] Subchapter 24: Car Rentals Subchapter 24: Car Rentals § 20-861 Reservations. § 20-861 Reservations. A motor vehicle rental business that reserves vehicles for consumers shall conspicuously display a sign or notice on its business premises that informs consumers of their rights pertaining to such reservations. The commissioner shall establish the rights pertaining to such reservations, and the form and content of such sign or notice, by rule. [ALP S-063] (L.L. 2021/080, 7/18/2021, eff. 11/15/2021) [ALP S-063] Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2021/080 . [ALP S-063] § 20-862 Penalties. § 20-862 Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this subchapter or any rules promulgated pursuant to this subchapter shall be subject to a civil penalty of: (i) $150 for the first violation; (ii) $250 for the second violation; and (iii) $350 for the third and any subsequent violation; except that a person shall be subject to a civil penalty of zero dollars for a first-time violation of section 20-861 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, if such person proves to the satisfaction of the department, within 30 days of the issuance of the notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the violation, that the violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured, shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of presenting proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of any settlement offer made by the department to a person who has received, for the first time, a notice of violation of section 20-861 of this subchapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder. The department shall permit such proof to be submitted electronically or in person. A person may seek review, in the department&apos;s administrative tribunal, of the determination that the person has not submitted proof of a cure within 15 days of receiving written notification of such determination. [ALP S-067] (L.L. 2021/080, 7/18/2021, eff. 11/15/2021; Am. L.L. 2021/098, 9/26/2021, eff. 11/15/2021) [ALP S-067] Editor&apos;s note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L. 2021/080 and L.L. 2021/098 . [ALP S-067] Subchapter 25: Automated Employment Decision Tools Subchapter 25: Automated Employment Decision Tools § 20-870 Definitions. § 20-870 Definitions. For the purposes of this subchapter, the following terms have the following meanings: [ALP S-068] Automated employment decision tool. The term &quot;automated employment decision tool&quot; means any computational process, derived from machine learning, statistical modeling, data analytics, or artificial intelligence, that issues simplified output, including a score, classification, or recommendation, that is used to substantially assist or replace discretionary decision making for making employment decisions that impact natural persons. The term &quot;automated employment decision tool&quot; does not include a tool that does not automate, support, substantially assist or replace discretionary decision-making processes and that does not materially impact natural persons, including, but not limited to, a junk email filter, firewall, antivirus software, calculator, spreadsheet, database, data set, or other compilation of data. [ALP S-068] Bias audit. The term &quot;bias audit&quot; means an impartial evaluation by an independent auditor. Such bias audit shall include but not be limited to the testing of an automated employment decision tool to assess the tool&apos;s disparate impact on persons of any component 1 category required to be reported by employers pursuant to subsection (c) of section 2000e-8 of title 42 of the United States code as specified in part 1602.7 of title 29 of the code of federal regulations. [ALP S-068] Employment decision. The term &quot;employment decision&quot; means to screen candidates for employment or employees for promotion within the city. [ALP S-068] (L.L. 2021/144, 12/11/2021, eff. 1/1/2023) [ALP S-068] § 20-871 Requirements for automated employment decision tools. § 20-871 Requirements for automated employment decision tools. a. In the city, it shall be unlawful for an employer or an employment agency to use an automated employment decision tool to screen a candidate or employee for an employment decision unless: [ALP S-068] 1. Such tool has been the subject of a bias audit conducted no more than one year prior to the use of such tool; and [ALP S-068] 2. A summary of the results of the most recent bias audit of such tool as well as the distribution date of the tool to which such audit applies has been made publicly available on the website of the employer or employment agency prior to the use of such tool. [ALP S-068] b. Notices required. In the city, any employer or employment agency that uses an automated employment decision tool to screen an employee or a candidate who has applied for a position for an employment decision shall notify each such employee or candidate who resides in the city of the following: [ALP S-068] 1. That an automated employment decision tool will be used in connection with the assessment or evaluation of such employee or candidate that resides in the city. Such notice shall be made no less than ten business days before such use and allow a candidate to request an alternative selection process or accommodation; [ALP S-068] 2. The job qualifications and characteristics that such automated employment decision tool will use in the assessment of such candidate or employee. Such notice shall be made no less than 10 business days before such use; and [ALP S-068] 3. If not disclosed on the employer or employment agency&apos;s website, information about the type of data collected for the automated employment decision tool, the source of such data and the employer or employment agency&apos;s data retention policy shall be available upon written request by a candidate or employee. Such information shall be provided within 30 days of the written request. Information pursuant to this section shall not be disclosed where such disclosure would violate local, state, or federal law, or interfere with a law enforcement investigation. [ALP S-068] (L.L. 2021/144, 12/11/2021, eff. 1/1/2023) [ALP S-068] § 20-872 Penalties. § 20-872 Penalties. a. Any person that violates any provision of this subchapter or any rule promulgated pursuant to this subchapter is liable for a civil penalty of not more than $500 for a first violation and each additional violation occurring on the same day as the first violation, and not less than $500 nor more than $1,500 for each subsequent violation. [ALP S-068] b. Each day on which an automated employment decision tool is used in violation of this section shall give rise to a separate violation of subdivision a of section 20-871 . [ALP S-068] c. Failure to provide any notice to a candidate or an employee in violation of paragraphs 1, 2 or 3 of subdivision b of section 20-871 shall constitute a separate violation. [ALP S-068] d. A proceeding to recover any civil penalty authorized by this subchapter is returnable to any tribunal established within the office of administrative trials and hearings or within any agency of the city designated to conduct such proceedings. [ALP S-068] (L.L. 2021/144, 12/11/2021, eff. 1/1/2023) [ALP S-068] § 20-873 Enforcement. § 20-873 Enforcement. The corporation counsel or such other persons designated by the corporation counsel on behalf of the department may initiate in any court of competent jurisdiction any action or proceeding that may be appropriate or necessary for correction of any violation issued pursuant this subchapter, including mandating compliance with the provisions of this chapter or such other relief as may be appropriate. [ALP S-068] (L.L. 2021/144, 12/11/2021, eff. 1/1/2023) [ALP S-068] § 20-874 Construction. § 20-874 Construction. The provisions of this subchapter shall not be construed to limit any right of any candidate or employee for an employment decision to bring a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction, or to limit the authority of the commission on human rights to enforce the provisions of title 8 , in accordance with law. [ALP S-068] (L.L. 2021/144, 12/11/2021, eff. 1/1/2023) [ALP S-068] Subchapter 26: Disclosure of Total Ticket Costs in Advertisements Subchapter 26: Disclosure of Total Ticket Costs in Advertisements § 20-880 Definitions. § 20-880 Definitions. As used in this subchapter, the following terms have the following meanings: [ALP S-085] Operator. The term &quot;operator&quot; means any person who owns, operates or controls a place of entertainment or who promotes or produces an event to be held at a place of entertainment. [ALP S-085] Place of entertainment. The term &quot;place of entertainment&quot; means any privately or publicly owned and operated entertainment facility located in New York city, including, but not limited to, a theater, stadium, arena, racetrack, museum, amusement park or other place where performances, concerts, athletic games or contests are held and for which an entry fee is charged. [ALP S-085] Ticket. The term &quot;ticket&quot; means any evidence of the right of entry to any place of entertainment. [ALP S-085] Total ticket cost. The term &quot;total ticket cost&quot; means the cost of a ticket inclusive of all fees and taxes that must be paid in order to purchase the ticket. [ALP S-085] (L.L. 2023/055, 5/12/2023, eff. 11/8/2023) [ALP S-085] § 20-881 Total ticket cost disclosure. § 20-881 Total ticket cost disclosure. a. Every advertisement purchased, produced, or posted by (i) an operator of a place of entertainment, (ii) such an operator&apos;s agent, licensee or other third-party ticket seller, or (iii) a platform that facilitates the sale or resale of tickets, and which includes in such advertisement a ticket cost or a range of ticket costs, shall disclose in such advertisement in a clear and conspicuous manner the total ticket cost, or range of total ticket costs, as applicable. [ALP S-085] b. An operator of a place of entertainment may rely on the information provided to such operator by such operator&apos;s agent, licensee, third-party ticket seller, or platform that facilitates the sale or resale of tickets regarding the total ticket cost or the range of total ticket costs where such information is otherwise unavailable. In a proceeding to collect a civil penalty pursuant to section 20-882 of this subchapter, it shall be a complete defense for a respondent operator to establish that such operator relied on the information provided by such operator&apos;s agent, licensee, third-party ticket seller, or platform that facilitates the sale or resale of tickets regarding the total ticket cost or the range of total ticket costs. A copy of a communication between the respondent operator and such operator&apos;s agent, licensee, third-party ticket seller, or platform that facilitates the sale or resale of tickets regarding the total ticket cost or the range of total ticket costs shall constitute prima facie evidence that such respondent relied on such information. [ALP S-085] c. An operator&apos;s agent, licensee, third-party ticket seller, or platform that facilitates the sale or resale of tickets may rely on information provided to it by an operator regarding the total ticket cost or the range of total ticket costs where such information is otherwise unavailable. In a proceeding to collect a civil penalty pursuant to section 20-882 of this subchapter, it shall be a complete defense for a respondent agent, licensee, third-party ticket seller, or platform that facilitates the sale or resale of tickets to establish that such respondent relied on the information provided by an operator regarding the total ticket cost or the range of total ticket costs. A copy of a communication between the respondent agent, licensee, third-party ticket seller, or platform that facilitates the sale or resale of tickets and an operator regarding the total ticket cost or the range of total ticket costs shall constitute prima facie evidence that such respondent relied on such information. [ALP S-085] (L.L. 2023/055, 5/12/2023, eff. 11/8/2023) [ALP S-085] § 20-882 Penalties. § 20-882 Penalties. a. Any person who violates any provision of this subchapter or any rule promulgated thereunder is liable for a civil penalty of zero dollars for a first violation, not more than $250 for a second violation, and not more than $500 for a third or subsequent violation. [ALP S-085] b. Each distinct advertisement that violates any provision of this subchapter or any rule promulgated thereunder shall constitute a separate violation. [ALP S-085] c. For the purposes of determining the total civil penalty, each day on which a violating advertisement is exposed to the public shall constitute a separate violation. [ALP S-085] (L.L. 2023/055, 5/12/2023, eff. 11/8/2023) [ALP S-085] 