                         New York City Department of Consumer and Worker Protection


                                      Notice of Adoption of Final Rule


Pursuant to the authority vested in the Commissioner of the Department of Consumer and Worker Protection by
Sections 1043 and 2203(f) of the New York City Charter and Section 20-104(b) of the New York City
Administrative Code, and in accordance with the requirements of Section 1043 of the New York City Charter,
the Department amends Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.

An initial version of this rule was proposed and published on September 23, 2022. A public hearing was held on
November 4, 2022, and comments regarding the rule were received. DCWP proposed a second version of this
rule on December 23, 2022. A public hearing was held on January 23, 2023, and comments regarding the rule
were received.

                                      Statement of Basis and Purpose

The Department of Consumer and Worker Protection (“DCWP” or “Department”) is adding rules to implement
new legislation regarding automated employment decision tools (“AEDT”). Local Law 144 of 2021 prohibits
employers and employment agencies from using an automated employment decision tool unless the tool has
been subject to a bias audit within one year of the use of the tool, information about the bias audit is publicly
available, and certain notices have been provided to employees or job candidates.

These rules establish that a bias audit of an AEDT must calculate the selection rate for each race/ethnicity and
sex category that is required to be reported on to the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (“EEOC”)
pursuant to the EEO Component 1 report, and compare the selection rates to the most selected category to
determine an impact ratio. These calculations are consistent with Section 1607.4 of the EEOC Uniform
Guidelines on Employee Selection Procedures. See 29 C.F.R. § 1607.4. These rules generally clarify obligations
of employers and employment agencies under the new law.

Specifically, these new rules will:
      Define terms;
      Clarify the requirements for a bias audit;
      Clarify the requirements for the published results of the required bias audit;
      Clarify the requirements for notices that employers and employment agencies must provide to employees
       and candidates for employment; and
      Clarify other obligations for the employer or employment agency.

The Department initially proposed a version of these rules in September 2022. The Department received
comments from the public, including from employers, employment agencies, law firms, AEDT developers, and
advocacy organizations. Various issues raised in the comments led to a second version of the proposed rules,
published in December 2022. Those changes included:

      Modifying the definition of AEDT to ensure greater focus;
      Clarifying that an “independent auditor” may not be employed or have a financial interest in an employer
       or employment agency that seeks to use or continue to use an AEDT or in a vendor that developed or
       distributed the AEDT;
      Revising the required calculation to be performed where an AEDT scores candidates;



                                                       1
      Clarifying that the required “impact ratio” must be calculated separately to compare sex categories,
       race/ethnicity categories, and intersectional categories;
      Clarifying the types of data that may be used to conduct a bias audit;
      Clarifying that multiple employers using the same AEDT may rely on the same bias audit so long as they
       provide historical data, if available, for the independent auditor to consider in such bias audit; and
      Clarifying that an AEDT may not be used if its most recent bias audit is more than a year old;

The Department received comments about the second version of the proposed rule from the public, including
from employers, employment agencies, law firms, AEDT developers, and advocacy organizations. Various
issues raised in the comments resulted in changes that are present in these final rules. These changes include:
      Modifying the definition of “machine learning, statistical modeling, data analytics, or artificial intelligence”
       to expand its scope;
      Adding a requirement that the bias audit indicate the number of individuals the AEDT assessed that are
       not included in the calculations because they fall within an unknown category, and requiring that number
       be included in the summary of results;
      Allowing an independent auditor to exclude a category that comprises less than 2% of the data being
       used for the bias audit from the calculations of impact ratio;
      Clarifying the examples of a bias audit;
      Clarifying when an employer or employment agency may rely on a bias audit conducted using the
       historical data of other employers or employment agencies;
      Providing examples of when an employer or employment agency may rely on a bias audit conducted with
       historical data, test data, or historical data from other employers and employment agencies;
      Clarifying that the number of applicants in a category and scoring rate of a category, if applicable, must
       be included in the summary of results.


New material is underlined.
[Deleted material is in brackets.]

“Shall” and “must” denote mandatory requirements and may be used interchangeably in the rules of this
department, unless otherwise specified or unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.




                                                          2
Section 1. Chapter 5 of Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York is amended to add Subchapter T to read
as follows:
                           Subchapter T: Automated Employment Decision Tools
§ 5-300. Definitions.
As used in this subchapter, the following terms have the following meanings:


       Automated Employment Decision Tool. “Automated employment decision tool” or “AEDT” means
       “Automated employment decision tool” as defined by § 20-870 of the Code where the phrase “to
       substantially assist or replace discretionary decision making” means:
              i.       to rely solely on a simplified output (score, tag, classification, ranking, etc.), with no other
                       factors considered; or
             ii.        to use a simplified output as one of a set of criteria where the simplified output is weighted
                       more than any other criterion in the set; or
            iii.       to use a simplified output to overrule conclusions derived from other factors including
                       human decision-making.

       Bias Audit. “Bias audit” means “Bias audit” as defined by § 20-870 of the Code.

       Candidate for Employment. “Candidate for employment” means a person who has applied for a specific
       employment position by submitting the necessary information or items in the format required by the
       employer or employment agency.

       Category. “Category” means any component 1 category required to be reported by employers pursuant
       to subsection (c) of section 2000e-8 of title 42 of the United States Code as specified in part 1602.7 of
       title 29 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as designated on the Equal Employment Opportunity
       Commission Employer Information Report EEO-1.

       Code. “Code” means the Administrative Code of the City of New York.

       Distribution Date. “Distribution date” means the date the employer or employment agency began using
       a specific AEDT.

       Employment Decision. “Employment decision” means “Employment decision” as defined by § 20-870
       of the Code.

       Employment Agency. “Employment agency” means “Employment agency” as defined by 6 RCNY § 5-
       249.

       Historical data. “Historical data” means data collected during an employer or employment agency’s use
       of an AEDT to assess candidates for employment or employees for promotion.

       Independent Auditor. “Independent auditor” means a person or group that is capable of exercising
       objective and impartial judgment on all issues within the scope of a bias audit of an AEDT. An auditor is
       not an independent auditor of an AEDT if the auditor:
               i.     is or was involved in using, developing, or distributing the AEDT;
              ii.     at any point during the bias audit, has an employment relationship with an employer or
                      employment agency that seeks to use or continue to use the AEDT or with a vendor that
                      developed or distributes the AEDT; or

                                                          3
      iii.       at any point during the bias audit, has a direct financial interest or a material indirect
                 financial interest in an employer or employment agency that seeks to use or continue to
                 use the AEDT or in a vendor that developed or distributed the AEDT.

Impact Ratio. “Impact ratio” means either (1) the selection rate for a category divided by the selection
rate of the most selected category or (2) the scoring rate for a category divided by the scoring rate for the
highest scoring category.

                  _________selection rate for a category________
Impact Ratio =      selection rate of the most selected category

OR

                   ______scoring rate for a category__________
Impact Ratio =      scoring rate of the highest scoring category


Machine learning, statistical modeling, data analytics, or artificial intelligence. “Machine learning,
statistical modeling, data analytics, or artificial intelligence” means a group of mathematical, computer-
based techniques:
         i.    that generate a prediction, meaning an expected outcome for an observation, such as an
               assessment of a candidate’s fit or likelihood of success, or that generate a classification,
               meaning an assignment of an observation to a group, such as categorizations based on
               skill sets or aptitude; and
         ii.   for which a computer at least in part identifies the inputs, the relative importance placed
               on those inputs, and, if applicable, other parameters for the models in order to improve
               the accuracy of the prediction or classification.

Scoring Rate. “Scoring Rate” means the rate at which individuals in a category receive a score above
the sample’s median score, where the score has been calculated by an AEDT.

Screen. “Screen” means to make a determination about whether a candidate for employment or
employee being considered for promotion should be selected or advanced in the hiring or promotion
process.

Selection Rate. “Selection rate” means the rate at which individuals in a category are either selected to
move forward in the hiring process or assigned a classification by an AEDT. Such rate may be calculated
by dividing the number of individuals in the category moving forward or assigned a classification by the
total number of individuals in the category who applied for a position or were considered for promotion.

Example. If 100 Hispanic women apply for a position and 40 are selected for an interview after use of an
AEDT, the selection rate for Hispanic women is 40/100 or 40%.

Simplified output. “Simplified output” means a prediction or classification as specified in the definition
for “machine learning, statistical modelling, data analytics, or artificial intelligence.” A simplified output
may take the form of a score (e.g., rating a candidate’s estimated technical skills), tag or categorization
(e.g., categorizing a candidate’s resume based on key words, assigning a skill or trait to a candidate),
recommendation (e.g., whether a candidate should be given an interview), or ranking (e.g., arranging a
list of candidates based on how well their cover letters match the job description). It does not refer to the
output from analytical tools that translate or transcribe existing text, e.g., convert a resume from a PDF
or transcribe a video or audio interview.

                                                  4
Test data. “Test data” means data used to conduct a bias audit that is not historical data.
§ 5-301 Bias Audit.
   (a) An employer or employment agency may not use or continue to use an AEDT if more than one year has
       passed since the most recent bias audit of the AEDT.
   (b) Where an AEDT selects candidates for employment or employees being considered for promotion to
       move forward in the hiring process or classifies them into groups, a bias audit must, at a minimum:
          (1) Calculate the selection rate for each category;
          (2) Calculate the impact ratio for each category;
          (3) Ensure that the calculations required in paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subdivision separately
              calculate the impact of the AEDT on:
                    i. Sex categories (e.g., impact ratio for selection of male candidates vs female candidates),
                   ii. Race/Ethnicity categories (e.g., impact ratio for selection of Hispanic or Latino
                       candidates vs Black or African American [Not Hispanic or Latino] candidates), and
                  iii. intersectional categories of sex, ethnicity, and race (e.g., impact ratio for selection of
                       Hispanic or Latino male candidates vs. Not Hispanic or Latino Black or African American
                       female candidates).
          (4) Ensure that the calculations in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of this subdivision are performed for
              each group, if an AEDT classifies candidates for employment or employees being considered
              for promotion into specified groups (e.g., leadership styles); and
          (5) Indicate the number of individuals the AEDT assessed that are not included in the required
              calculations because they fall within an unknown category.


       Example: An employer wants to use an AEDT to screen resumes and schedule interviews for a job
       posting. To do so, the employer must ensure that a bias audit of the AEDT was conducted no more than
       a year before the planned use of the AEDT. This bias audit is necessary even though the employer is not
       using the AEDT to make the final hiring decision, but only to screen at an early point in the application
       process. The employer asks the vendor for a bias audit. The vendor provides historical data regarding
       applicant selection that the vendor has collected from multiple employers to an independent auditor who
       will conduct a bias audit as follows:



                                Sex Categories
                          # of         #      Selection
                                                                   Impact Ratio
                        Applicants Selected     Rate
 Male                         1390           667         48%                    1.00
 Female                       1181           555         47%                   0.979




                                                        5
                                         Race/Ethnicity Categories
                                                                  # of          #         Selection     Impact
                                                                Applicants   Selected       Rate         Ratio
                      Hispanic or Latino                              408          204          50%       0.97
               White (Not Hispanic or Latino)                         797          412          52%       1.00
     Black or African American (Not Hispanic or Latino)               390          170          44%       0.84
 Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander (Not Hispanic or Latino)         119           52          44%       0.85
               Asian (Not Hispanic or Latino)                         616          302          49%       0.95
 Native American or Alaska Native (Not Hispanic or Latino)             41           18          44%       0.85
        Two or More Races (Not Hispanic or Latino)                    213           96          45%       0.87



                                        Intersectional Categories

                                                              # of          #            Selection    Impact
                                                            Applicants   Selected          Rate        Ratio
                                      Male                      205          90           43.9%       0.841
     Hispanic or Latino
                                    Female                      190          82           43.2%       0.827
                                     White                      412          215          52.2%       1.000
                           Black or African American            226          95           42.0%       0.806
                           Native Hawaiian or Pacific
                                                                87           37           42.5%       0.815
                                    Islander
                     Male
                                      Asian                     321          167          52.0%       0.997
                           Native American or Alaska
                                                                24           11           45.8%       0.878
                                     Native
 Non/Hispanic or              Two or More Races                 115          52           45.2%       0.866
     Latino                          White                      385          197          51.2%       0.981
                           Black or African American            164          75           45.7%       0.876
                           Native Hawaiian or Pacific
                                                                32           15           46.9%       0.898
                                    Islander
                    Female
                                      Asian                     295          135          45.8%       0.877
                           Native American or Alaska
                                                                17            7           41.2%       0.789
                                     Native
                              Two or More Races                 98           44           44.9%       0.860


Note: The AEDT was also used to assess 250 individuals with an unknown sex or race/ethnicity category. Data
on those individuals was not included in the calculations above.
   (c) Where an AEDT scores candidates for employment or employees being considered for promotion, a bias
       audit must, at a minimum:
          (1) Calculate the median score for the full sample of applicants;
          (2) Calculate the scoring rate for individuals in each category;

                                                       6
          (3) Calculate the impact ratio for each category;
          (4) Ensure that the calculations required in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of this subdivision
              separately calculate the impact of the AEDT on:
                    i. Sex categories (i.e., impact ratio for selection of male candidates vs female candidates),
                   ii. Race/Ethnicity categories (e.g., impact ratio for selection of Hispanic or Latino
                       candidates vs Black or African American [Not Hispanic or Latino] candidates), and
                  iii. intersectional categories of sex, ethnicity, and race (e.g., impact ratio for selection of
                       Hispanic or Latino male candidates vs. Not Hispanic or Latino Black or African American
                       female candidates); and
          (5) Indicate the number of individuals the AEDT assessed that are not included in the required
              calculations because they fall within an unknown category.
  (d) Notwithstanding the requirements of paragraphs (2) and (3) of subdivision (b) and paragraphs (3) and
      (4) of subdivision (c), an independent auditor may exclude a category that represents less than 2% of
      the data being used for the bias audit from the required calculations for impact ratio. Where such a
      category is excluded, the summary of results must include the independent auditor’s justification for the
      exclusion, as well as the number of applicants and scoring rate or selection rate for the excluded
      category.

      Example: An employer uses an AEDT to score applicants for “culture fit.” To do so, the employer must
      ensure that a bias audit of the AEDT was conducted no more than a year before the use of the AEDT.
      The employer provides historical data on “culture fit” score of applicants for each category to an
      independent auditor to conduct a bias audit as follows:


                         Sex Categories

                        # of        Scoring
                      Applicants                   Impact Ratio
                                     Rate
Male                       92         54.3%                     1.00
Female                     76         44.7%                     0.82



                                   Race/Ethnicity Categories

                                                                 # of         Scoring     Impact
                                                               Applicants      Rate        Ratio
                     Hispanic or Latino                                 28      64.2%        1.00
              White (Not Hispanic or Latino)                            40      37.5%        0.58
    Black or African American (Not Hispanic or Latino)                  32      50.0%        0.78
Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander (Not Hispanic or Latino)             8      62.5%        0.97
              Asian (Not Hispanic or Latino)                            24      41.7%        0.65
Native American or Alaska Native (Not Hispanic or Latino)               16      62.5%        0.97
       Two or More Races (Not Hispanic or Latino)                       20      50.0%        0.78


                                                       7
                                            Intersectional Categories


                                                                            # of           Scoring        Impact
                                                                          Applicants        Rate           Ratio
                                                Male                          16             75%            1.00
     Hispanic or Latino
                                               Female                         12             50%            0.67
                                                White                         20             35%            0.47
                                     Black or African American                20             50%            0.67
                                Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander            4             75%            1.00
                       Male
                                                Asian                         12            58.3%           0.78
                                 Native American or Alaska Native              8             62.5           0.83
 Non/Hispanic or                        Two or More Races                     12             50%            0.67
     Latino                                     White                         20             40%            0.53
                                     Black or African American                12             50%            .67
                                Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander            4             50%            0.67
                     Female
                                                Asian                         12             25%            0.33
                                 Native American or Alaska Native              8            62.5%           0.83
                                        Two or More Races                      8             50%            0.67


Note: The AEDT was used to assess 15 individuals with an unknown sex or race/ethnicity category. Data on
these individuals was not included in the calculations above.
§ 5-302 Data Requirements.
   (a) Historical Data. A bias audit conducted pursuant to section 5-301 of this Chapter must use historical
       data of the AEDT. The historical data used to conduct a bias audit may be from one or more employers
       or employment agencies that use the AEDT. However, an individual employer or employment agency
       may rely on a bias audit of an AEDT that uses the historical data of other employers or employment
       agencies only in the following circumstances: if such employer or employment agency provided historical
       data from its own use of the AEDT to the independent auditor conducting the bias audit or if such
       employer or employment agency has never used the AEDT.
   (b) Test Data. Notwithstanding the requirements of subdivision (a) of this section, an employer or
       employment agency may rely on a bias audit that uses test data if insufficient historical data is available
       to conduct a statistically significant bias audit. If a bias audit uses test data, the summary of results of the
       bias audit must explain why historical data was not used and describe how the test data used was
       generated and obtained.

       Example 1: An employer is planning to use an AEDT for the first time. The employer may rely on a bias
       audit conducted using the historical data of other employers or employment agencies, or on a bias audit
       conducted using test data.



                                                          8
      Example 2: An employment agency has been using an AEDT for 6 months. The bias audit the
      employment agency relied on before its first use of the AEDT was conducted 10 months ago using test
      data. The employment agency will need an updated bias audit if it will continue to use the AEDT once 12
      months have passed since the bias audit it first relied on was conducted. The employment agency’s data
      from 6 months of use of the AEDT is not sufficient on its own to conduct a statistically significant bias
      audit. The employment agency may rely on a bias audit using the historical data of other employers and
      employment agencies if it provides its 6 months of historical data to the independent auditor for use and
      consideration. The employment agency may also rely on a bias audit that uses test data.

      Example 3: An employer has been using an AEDT for 3 years and will soon need an updated bias audit.
      The employer has statistically significant data from its 3 years of use of the AEDT. The employer may
      rely on a bias audit conducted using historical data from multiple employers if it provides its 3 years of
      historical data to the independent auditor for use and consideration. The employer may also rely on a
      bias audit conducted using historical data from its own use of the AEDT, without any data from other
      employers or employment agencies. The employer may not rely on a bias audit conducted using test
      data.

§ 5-303 Published Results.
   (a) Before the use of an AEDT, an employer or employment agency in the city must make the following
       publicly available on the employment section of their website in a clear and conspicuous manner:
            (1)    The date of the most recent bias audit of the AEDT and a summary of the results, which shall
                   include the source and explanation of the data used to conduct the bias audit, the number of
                   individuals the AEDT assessed that fall within an unknown category, and the number of
                   applicants or candidates, the selection or scoring rates, as applicable, and the impact ratios
                   for all categories; and,
            (2)    The distribution date of the AEDT.
   (b) The requirements of subdivision (a) of this section may be met with an active hyperlink to a website
       containing the required summary of results and distribution date, provided that the link is clearly identified
       as a link to results of the bias audit.
   (c) An employer or employment agency must keep the summary of results and distribution date posted for
       at least 6 months after its latest use of the AEDT for an employment decision.

§ 5-304 Notice to Candidates and Employees.
      (a) The notice required by § 20-871(b)(1) of the Code must include instructions for how an individual can
          request an alternative selection process or a reasonable accommodation under other laws, if
          available. Nothing in this subchapter requires an employer or employment agency to provide an
          alternative selection process.
      (b) To comply with § 20-871(b)(1) and (2) of the Code, an employer or employment agency may provide
          notice to a candidate for employment who resides in the city by doing any of the following:
               (1) Provide notice on the employment section of its website in a clear and conspicuous manner
                   at least 10 business days before use of an AEDT;
               (2) Provide notice in a job posting at least 10 business days before use of an AEDT; or,
               (3) Provide notice to candidates for employment via U.S. mail or e-mail at least 10 business days
                   before use of an AEDT.
      (c) To comply with § 20-871(b)(1) and (2) of the Code, an employer or employment agency may provide
          notice to an employee being considered for promotion who resides in the city by doing any of the
          following:
               (1) Provide notice in a written policy or procedure that is provided to employees at least 10
                   business days before use of an AEDT;


                                                         9
       (2) Provide notice in a job posting at least 10 business days before use of an AEDT; or,
       (3) Provide notice via U.S. mail or e-mail at least 10 business days before use of an AEDT.
(d) To comply with § 20-871(b)(3) of the Code, an employer or employment agency must:
       (1) Provide information on the employment section of its website in a clear and conspicuous
           manner about its AEDT data retention policy, the type of data collected for the AEDT, and the
           source of the data;
       (2) Post instructions on the employment section of its website in a clear and conspicuous manner
           for how to make a written request for such information, and if a written request is received,
           provide such information within 30 days; and
       (3) Provide an explanation to a candidate for employment or employee being considered for
           promotion why disclosure of such information would violate local, state, or federal law, or
           interfere with a law enforcement investigation.




                                               10
